REDIRECT Applied ethics
'''Anarchism''' originated as a term of abuse first used against early working class radicals including the Diggers of the English Revolution and the ''sans culottes'' of the French Revolution., from the final protocols of the "International Conference of Rome for the Social Defense Against Anarchists", 1898 ref, it has also been taken up as a positive label by self defined anarchists.
The word '''anarchism''' is derived from the Greek '''' ("without archons (ruler, chief, king)"). Anarchism as a political philosophy, is the belief that ''rulers'' are unnecessary and should be abolished, although there are differing interpretations of what this means. Anarchism also refers to related social movements) that advocate the elimination of authoritarian institutions, particularly the state.ref on Wikiquote, accessed 2006 ref The word "anarchy," as most anarchists use it, does not imply chaos, nihilism, or anomie, but rather a harmonious anti authoritarian society. In place of what are regarded as authoritarian political structures and coercive economic institutions, anarchists advocate social relations based upon voluntary association of autonomous individuals, mutual aid, and self governance.
While anarchism is most easily defined by what it is against, anarchists also offer positive visions of what they believe to be a truly free society. However, ideas about how an anarchist society might work vary considerably, especially with respect to economics there is also disagreement about how a free society might be brought about.
Origins and predecessors
Kropotkin, and others, argue that before recorded history, human society was organized on anarchist principles.refKropotkin, Peter. ''"Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution"'', 1902. ref Most anthropologists follow Kropotkin and Engels in believing that hunter gatherer bands were egalitarian and lacked division of labour, accumulated wealth, or decreed law, and had equal access to resources.refEngels, Freidrich. ''""'', 1884. ref
Anarchists including the The Anarchy Organisation and Rothbard find anarchist attitudes in Taoism from Ancient China.refThe Anarchy Organization (Toronto). ''Taoism and Anarchy.'' April 14 2002 refrefRothbard, Murray. ''""'', an extract from ''""'', The Journal of Libertarian Studies, 9 (2) Fall 1990. ref Kropotkin found similar ideas in stoic Zeno of Citium. According to Kropotkin, Zeno "repudiated the omnipotence of the state, its intervention and regimentation, and proclaimed the sovereignty of the moral law of the individual". ref, written by Peter Kropotkin, from Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1910 ref
The Anabaptists of 16th century Europe are sometimes considered to be religious forerunners of modern anarchism. Bertrand Russell, in his ''History of Western Philosophy'', writes that the Anabaptists "repudiated all law, since they held that the good man will be guided at every moment by the Holy Spirit... f rom this premise they arrive at communism...."refRussell, Bertrand. ''"Ancient philosophy"'' in ''A History of Western Philosophy, and its connection with political and social circumstances from the earliest times to the present day'', 1945. ref The Diggers or "True Levellers" were an early communistic movement during the time of the English Civil War, and are considered by some as forerunners of modern anarchism.ref, from Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1994. ref
In the modern era, the first to use the term to mean something other than chaos was Louis Armand, Baron de Lahontan in his ''Nouveaux voyages dans l'Am rique septentrionale'', (1703), where he described the indigenous American society, which had no state, laws, prisons, priests, or private property, as being in anarchyref ref. Russell Means, a libertarian and leader in the American Indian Movement, has repeatedly stated that he is "an anarchist, and so are all his ancestors."
In 1793, in the thick of the French Revolution, William Godwin published ''An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice'' . Although Godwin did not use the word ''anarchism'', many later anarchists have regarded this book as the first major anarchist text, and Godwin as the "founder of philosophical anarchism." But at this point no anarchist movement yet existed, and the term ''anarchiste'' was known mainly as an insult hurled by the bourgeois Girondins at more radical elements in the French revolution.
The first self labelled anarchist
It is commonly held that it wasn't until Pierre Joseph Proudhon published ''What is Property?'' in 1840 that the term "anarchist" was adopted as a self description. It is for this reason that some claim Proudhon as the founder of modern anarchist theory. In What is Property? Proudhon answers with the famous accusation "Property is theft." In this work he opposed the institution of decreed "property" (propri t ), where owners have complete rights to "use and abuse" their property as they wish, such as exploiting workers for profit.ref name "proudhon prop"Proudhon, Pierre Joseph. ''""'' from ''"What is Property?"'', 1840 ref In its place Proudhon supported what he called 'possession' individuals can have limited rights to use resources, capital and goods in accordance with principles of equality and justice.
Proudhon's vision of anarchy, which he called mutualism (mutuellisme), involved an exchange economy where individuals and groups could trade the products of their labor using ''labor notes'' which represented the amount of working time involved in production. This would ensure that no one would profit from the labor of others. Workers could freely join together in co operative workshops. An interest free bank would be set up to provide everyone with access to the means of production. Proudhon's ideas were influential within French working class movements, and his followers were active in the Revolution of 1848 in France.
Proudhon's philosophy of property is complex: it was developed in a number of works over his lifetime, and there are differing interpretations of some of his ideas. ''For more detailed discussion see here.''
Max Stirner's Egoism
In his ''The Ego and Its Own'' Stirner argued that most commonly accepted social institutions including the notion of State, property as a right, natural rights in general, and the very notion of society were mere illusions or ''ghosts'' in the mind, saying of society that "the individuals are its reality." He advocated egoism and a form of amoralism, in which individuals would unite in 'associations of egoists' only when it was in their self interest to do so. For him, property simply comes about through might: "Whoever knows how to take, to defend, the thing, to him belongs property." And, "What I have in my power, that is my own. So long as I assert myself as holder, I am the proprietor of the thing."
Stirner never called himself an anarchist he accepted only the label 'egoist'. Nevertheless, his ideas were influential on many individualistically inclined anarchists, although interpretations of his thought are diverse.
American individualist anarchism
In 1825 Josiah Warren had participated in a communitarian experiment headed by Robert Owen called New Harmony, which failed in a few years amidst much internal conflict. Warren blamed the community's failure on a lack of individual sovereignty and a lack of private property. Warren proceeded to organise experimenal anarchist communities which respected what he called "the sovereignty of the individual" at Utopia and Modern Times. In 1833 Warren wrote and published ''The Peaceful Revolutionist'', which some have noted to be the first anarchist periodical ever published. Benjamin Tucker says that Warren "was the first man to expound and formulate the doctrine now known as Anarchism." (''Liberty'' XIV (December, 1900):1)
Benjamin Tucker became interested in anarchism through meeting Josiah Warren and William B. Greene. He edited and published ''Liberty'' from August 1881 to April 1908 it is widely considered to be the finest individualist anarchist periodical ever issued in the English language. Tucker's conception of individualist anarchism incorporated the ideas of a variety of theorists: Greene's ideas on mutual banking Warren's ideas on cost as the limit of price (a heterodox variety of labour theory of value) Proudhon's market anarchism Max Stirner's egoism and, Herbert Spencer's "law of equal freedom". Tucker strongly supported the individual's right to own the product of his or her labour as "private property", and believed in a ref name "tucker pay"Tucker, Benjamin. ''""'' Individual Liberty: Selections From the Writings of Benjamin R. Tucker, Vanguard Press, New York, 1926, Kraus Reprint Co., Millwood, NY, 1973. refmarket economy for trading this property. He argued that in a truly free market system without the state, the abundance of competition would eliminate profits and ensure that all workers received the full value of their labor.
Other 19th century individualists included Lysander Spooner, Stephen Pearl Andrews, and Victor Yarros.
The First International
In Europe, harsh reaction followed the revolutions of 1848. Twenty years later in 1864 the International Workingmen's Association, sometimes called the 'First International', united some diverse European revolutionary currents including anarchism. Due to its genuine links to active workers movements the International became signficiant.
From the start Karl Marx was a leading figure in the International: he was elected to every succeeding General Council of the association. The first objections to Marx came from the Mutualists who opposed communism and statism. Shortly after Mikhail Bakunin and his followers joined in 1868, the First International became polarised into two camps, with Marx and Bakunin as their respective figureheads. The clearest difference between the camps was over strategy. The anarchists around Bakunin favoured (in Kropotkin's words) "direct economical struggle against capitalism, without interfering in the political parliamentary agitation." At that time Marx and his followers focused on parliamentary activity.
Bakunin characterised Marx's ideas as authoritarian, and predicted that if a Marxist party gained to power its leaders would end up as bad as the ruling class they had fought against.refBakunin, Mikhail. ''""'' ref In 1872 the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress. This is often cited as the origin of the conflict between anarchists and Marxists. From this moment the ''social democratic'' and ''libertarian'' currents of socialism had distinct organisations including rival 'internationals'.
Anarchist Communism
Proudhon and Bakunin both opposed communism, associating it with statism. However, in the 1870s many anarchists moved away from Bakunin's economic thinking (called "collectivism") and embraced communist concepts. Communists believed the means of production should be owned collectively, and that goods be distributed by need, not labor.
An early anarchist communist was Joseph D jacque, the first person to describe himself as "libertarian". (in French) ref Unlike Proudhon, he argued that "it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature." He announced his ideas in his US published journal Le Libertaire (1858 1861).
Peter Kropotkin, often seen as the most important theorist, outlined his economic ideas in The Conquest of Bread and Fields, Factories and Workshops. He felt co operation is more beneficial than competition, illustrated in nature in Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1897). Subsequent anarchist communists include Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman. Many in the anarcho syndicalist movements (see below) saw anarchist communism as their objective. Isaac Puente's 1932 Comunismo Libertario was adopted by the Spanish CNT as its manifesto for a post revolutionary society.
Some anarchists disliked merging communism with anarchism. Several individualist anarchists maintained that abolition of private property was not consistent with liberty. For example, Benjamin Tucker, whilst professing respect for Kropotkin and publishing his work, described communist anarchism as "pseudo anarchism".ref name "tucker pay"
Propaganda of the deed
was an outspoken advocate of violence
Anarchists have often been portrayed as dangerous and violent, due mainly to a number of high profile violent acts, including riots, assassinations, insurrections, and terrorism by some anarchists. Some revolutionaries of the late 19th century encouraged acts of political violence, such as bombings and the assassinations of heads of state to further anarchism. Such actions have sometimes been called 'propaganda by the deed'.
One of the more outspoken advocates of this strategy was Johann Most, who said "the existing system will be quickest and most radically overthrown by the annihilation of its exponents. Therefore, massacres of the enemies of the people must be set in motion." Most's preferred method of terrorism, dynamite, earned him the moniker "Dynamost."
However, there is no consensus on the legitimacy or utility of violence in general. Mikhail Bakunin and Errico Malatesta, for example, wrote of violence as a necessary and sometimes desirable force in revolutionary settings. But at the same time, they denounced acts of individual terrorism. (Malatesta in "On Violence" and Bakunin when he refuted Nechaev).
Other anarchists, sometimes identified as pacifist anarchists, advocated complete nonviolence. Leo Tolstoy, whose philosophy is often viewed as a form of Christian anarchism ''(see below)'', was a notable exponent of nonviolent resistance.
Anarchism in the labour movement
Anarcho syndicalism was an early 20th century working class movement seeking to overthrow capitalism and the state to institute a worker controlled society. The movement pursued industrial actions, such as general strike, as a primary strategy. Many anarcho syndicalists believed in anarchist communism, though not all communists believed in syndicalism.
After the 1871 repression French anarchism reemerged, influencing the ''Bourses de Travails'' of autonomous workers groups and trade unions. From this movement the Conf d ration G n rale du Travail (General Confederation of Work, CGT) was formed in 1895 as the first major anarcho syndicalist movement. Emile Pataud and Emile Pouget's writing for the CGT saw libertarian communism developing from a general strike. After 1914 the CGT moved away from anarcho syndicalism due to the appeal of Bolshevism. French style syndicalism was a significant movement in Europe prior to 1921, and remained a significant movement in Spain until the mid 1940s.
The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), founded in 1905 in the US, espoused unionism and sought a general strike to usher in a stateless society. In 1923 100,000 members existed, with the support of up to 300,000. Though not explicitly anarchist, they organized by rank and file democracy, embodying a spirit of resistance that has inspired many Anglophone syndicalists.
Spanish anarchist trade union federations were formed in the 1870's, 1900 and 1910. The most successful was the Confederaci n Nacional del Trabajo (National Confederation of Labour: CNT), founded in 1910. Prior to the 1940s the CNT was the major force in Spanish working class politics. With a membership of 1.58 million in 1934, the CNT played a major role in the Spanish Civil War. ''See also:'' Anarchism in Spain.
Syndicalists like Ricardo Flores Mag n were key figures in the Mexican Revolution. Latin American anarchism was strongly influenced, extending to the Zapatista rebellion and the factory occupation movements in Argentina. In Berlin in 1922 the CNT was joined with the International Workers Association, an anarcho syndicalist successor to the First International.
Contemporary anarcho syndicalism continues as a minor force in many socities much smaller than in the 1910s, 20s and 30s.
The largest organised anarchist movement today is in Spain, in the form of the Confederaci n General del Trabajo and the CNT. The CGT claims a paid up membership of 60,000, and received over a million votes in Spanish syndical elections. Other active syndicalist movements include the US Workers Solidarity Alliance, and the UK Solidarity Federation. The revolutionary industrial unionist Industrial Workers of the World also exists, claiming 2,000 paid members. Contemporary critics of anarcho syndicalism and revolutionary industrial unionism claim that they are workerist and fail to deal with economic life outside work. Post leftist critics such as Bob Black claim anarcho syndicalism advocates oppressive social structures, such as work and the workplace.
Anarcho syndicalists in general uphold principles of workers solidarity, direct action, and self management.
The Russian Revolution
The Russian Revolution of 1917 was a seismic event in the development of anarchism as a movement and as a philosophy.
Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and October revolutions, many anarchists initially supporting the Bolshevik coup. However the Bolsheviks soon turned against the anarchists and other left wing opposition, a conflict which culminated in the 1918 Kronstadt rebellion. Anarchists in central Russia were imprisoned or driven underground, or joined the victorious Bolsheviks. In Ukraine anarchists fought in the civil war against both Whites and Bolsheviks within the Makhnovshchina peasant army led by Nestor Makhno).
Expelled American anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman before leaving Russia were amongst those agitating in response to Bolshevik policy and the suppression of the Kronstadt uprising. Both wrote classic accounts of their experiences in Russia, aiming to expose the reality of Bolshevik control. For them, Bakunin's predictions about the consequences of Marxist rule had proved all too true.
The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally. Many workers and activists saw Bolshevik success as setting an example Communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements. In France and the US for example, the major syndicalist movements of the CGT and IWW began to realign themselves away from anarchism and towards the Communist International.
In Paris, the Dielo Truda group of Russian anarchist exiles which included Nestor Makhno concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of Bolshevism. Their 1926 manifesto, known as the Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists, was supported by some communist anarchists, though opposed by many others.
The ''Platform'' continues to inspire some contemporary anarchist groups who believe in an anarchist movement organised around its principles of 'theoretical unity', 'tactical unity', 'collective responsibility' and 'federalism'. Platformist groups today include the Workers Solidarity Movement in Ireland, the UK's Anarchist Federation, and the late North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists in the northeastern United States and bordering Canada.
The fight against fascism
, 1936. Members of the CNT construct armoured cars to fight against the fascists in one of the collectivised factories.
In the 1920s and 1930s the familiar dynamics of anarchism's conflict with the state were transformed by the rise of fascism in Europe. In many cases, European anarchists faced difficult choices should they join in popular fronts with reformist democrats and Soviet led Communists against a common fascist enemy? Luigi Fabbri, an exile from Italian fascism, was amongst those arguing that fascism was something different:
:"Fascism is not just another form of government which, like all others, uses violence. It is the most authoritarian and the most violent form of government imaginable. It represents the utmost glorification of the theory and practice of the principle of authority."
In France, where the fascists came close to insurrection in the February 1934 riots, anarchists divided over a 'united front' policy. In Spain, the CNT initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance, and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory. But in 1936, the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power. Months later, the ruling class responded with an attempted coup, and the Spanish Civil War (1936 39) was underway.
In reponse to the army rebellion an anarchist inspired movement of peasants and workers, supported by armed militias, took control of the major city of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivized the land. But even before the eventual fascist victory in 1939, the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists. The CNT leadership often appeared confused and divided, with some members controversially entering the government. Stalinist led troops suppressed the collectives, and persecuted both dissident marxists and anarchists.
Since the late 1970s anarchists have been involved in fighting the rise of neo fascist groups. In Germany and the United Kingdom some anarchists worked within militant anti fascist groups alongside members of the Marxist left. They advocated directly combating fascists with physical force rather than relying on the state. Since the late 1990s, a similar tendency has developed within US anarchism. ''See also: Anti Racist Action (US), Anti Fascist Action (UK), Antifa''
Religious anarchism
1828 1910
Most anarchist culture tends to be secular if not outright anti religious. However, the combination of religious social conscience, historical religiousity amongst oppressed social classes, and the compatibility of some interpretations of religious traditions with anarchism has resulted in religious anarchism.
Christian anarchists believe that there is no higher authority than God, and oppose earthly authority such as government and established churches. They believe that Jesus' teachings were clearly anarchistic, but were corrupted when "Christianity" was declared the official religion of Rome. Christian anarchists, who follow Jesus' directive to "turn the other cheek", are strict pacifists. The most famous advocate of Christian anarchism was Leo Tolstoy, author of ''The Kingdom of God is Within You'', who called for a society based on compassion, nonviolent principles and freedom. Christian anarchists tend to form experimental communities. They also occasionally resist taxation. Many Christian anarchists are vegetarian or vegan.
Christian anarchy can be said to have roots as old as the religion's birth, as the early church exhibits many anarchistic tendencies, such as communal goods and wealth. By aiming to obey utterly certain of the Bible's teachings certain anabaptist groups of sixteenth century Europe attempted to emulate the early church's social economic organisation and philosophy by regarding it as the only social structure capable of true obediance to Jesus' teachings, and utterly rejected (in theory) all earthly hierarchies and authority (and indeed non anabaptists in general) and violence as ungodly. Such groups, for example the Hutterites, typically went from initially anarchistic beginnings to, as their movements stabalised, more authoritarian social models.
Chinese Anarchism was most influential in the 1920s. Strands of Chinese anarchism included Tai Xu's Buddhist Anarchism which was influenced by Tolstoy and the well field system.
Neopaganism, with its focus on the environment and equality, along with its often decentralized nature, has lead to a number of neopagan anarchists. One of the most prominent is Starhawk, who writes extensively about both spirituality and activism.
Anarchism and feminism
Early French feminists such as Jenny d'H ricourt and Juliette Adam criticised the mysogyny in the anarchism of Proudhon during the 1850s.
Anarcha feminism is a kind of radical feminism that espouses the belief that patriarchy is a fundamental problem in society. While anarchist feminism has existed for more than a hundred years, its explicit formulation as ''anarcha feminism'' dates back to the early 70sref ref, during the second wave feminist movement. Anarcha feminism, views patriarchy as the first manifestation of hierarchy in human history thus, the first form of oppression occurred in the dominance of male over female. Anarcha feminists then conclude that if feminists are against patriarchy, they must also be against all forms of hierarchy, and therefore must reject the authoritarian nature of the state and capitalism.
Anarcho primitivists see the creation of gender roles and patriarchy a creation of the start of civilization, and therefore consider primitivism to also be an anarchist school of thought that addresses feminist concerns. Eco feminism is often considered a feminist variant of green anarchist feminist thought.
Anarcha feminism is most often associated with early 20th century authors and theorists such as Emma Goldman and Voltairine de Cleyre, although even early first wave feminist Mary Wollstonecraft held proto anarchist views, and William Godwin is often considered a feminist anarchist precursor. It should be noted that Goldman and de Cleyre, though they both opposed the state, had opposing philosophies, as de Cleyre explains: "Miss Goldman is a communist I am an individualist. She wishes to destroy the right of property, I wish to assert it. I make my war upon privilege and authority, whereby the right of property, the true right in that which is proper to the individual, is annihilated. She believes that co operation would entirely supplant competition I hold that competition in one form or another will always exist, and that it is highly desirable it should." In the Spanish Civil War, an anarcha feminist group, "Free Women", organized to defend both anarchist and feminist ideas.
In the modern day anarchist movement, many anarchists, male or female, consider themselves feminists, and anarcha feminist ideas are growing. The publishing of Quiet Rumors, an anarcha feminist reader, has helped to spread various kinds of anti authoritarian and anarchist feminist ideas to the broader movement. Wendy McElroy has popularized an individualist anarchism take on feminism in her books, articles, and individualist feminist website.ref ref
Anarcho capitalism
(1926 1995)
Anarcho capitalism is a predominantly United States based theoretical tradition that desires a stateless society with the economic system of free market capitalism. Unlike other branches of anarchism, it does not oppose profit or capitalism. Consequently, most anarchists do not recognise anarcho capitalism as a form of anarchism.
Murray Rothbard's synthesis of classical liberalism and Austrian economics was germinal for the development of contemporary anarcho capitalist theory. He defines anarcho capitalism in terms of the non aggression principle, based on the concept of Natural Law. Competiting theorists use egoism, utilitarianism (used by David Friedman), or contractarianism (used by Jan Narveson). Some minarchists, such as Ayn Rand, Robert Nozick, and Robert A. Heinlein, have influenced anarcho capitalism.
Some anarcho capitalists, along with some right wing libertarian historians such as David Hart and Ralph Raico, considered similar philosophies existing prior to Rothbard to be anarcho capitalist, such as those of Gustave de Molinari and Auberon Herbert refMolinari, Gustave de. '''', translated by J. Huston McCulloch, Occasional Papers Series 2 (Richard M. Ebeling, Editor), New York: The Center for Libertarian Studies, May 1977. refref name "david hart" refRaico, Ralph Ecole Polytechnique, Centre de Recherce en Epistemologie Appliquee, Unit associ e au CNRS (2004). ref Opponents of anarcho capitalists dispute these claims.refMcKay, Iain Elkin, Gary Neal, Dave ''et al'' ''An Anarchist FAQ Version 11.2'' Accessed February 20, 2006. ref
The place of anarcho capitalism within anarchism, and indeed whether it is a form of anarchism at all, is highly controversial. For more on this debate see ''Anarchism and anarcho capitalism''.
Anarchism and the environment
Since the late 1970s anarchists in Anglophone and European countries have been taking action for the natural environment. Eco anarchists or Green anarchists believe in deep ecology. This is a worldview that embraces biodiversity and sustainability. Eco anarchists often use direct action against what they see as earth destroying institutions. Of particular importance is the Earth First! movement, that takes action such as tree sitting. Another important component is ecofeminism, which sees the domination of nature as a metaphor for the domination of women. Green anarchism also involves a critique of industrial capitalism, and, for some green anarchists, civilization itself.
Primitivism is a predominantly Western philosophy that advocates a return to a pre industrial and usually pre agricultural society. It develops a critique of industrial civilization. In this critique technology and development have alienated people from the natural world. This philosophy develops themes present in the political action of the Luddites and the writings of Jean Jacques Rousseau. Primitivism developed in the context of the Reclaim the Streets, Earth First! and the Earth Liberation Front movements. John Zerzan wrote that civilization not just the state would need to fall for anarchy to be achieved. Anarcho primitivists point to the anti authoritarian nature of many 'primitive' or hunter gatherer societies throughout the world's history, as examples of anarchist societies.
Other branches and offshoots
Anarchism generates many eclectic and syncretic philosophies and movements. Since the Western social formet in the 1960s and 1970s a number new of movements and schools have appeared. Most of these stances are limited to even smaller numbers than the schools and movements listed above.
'''Post left anarchy''' Post left anarchy (also called egoist anarchism) seeks to distance itself from the traditional "left" communists, liberals, social democrats, etc. and to escape the confines of ideology in general. Post leftists argue that anarchism has been weakened by its long attachment to contrary "leftist" movements and single issue causes (anti war, anti nuclear, etc.). It calls for a synthesis of anarchist thought and a specifically anti authoritarian revolutionary movement outside of the leftist milieu. It often focuses on the individual rather than speaking in terms of class or other broad generalizations and shuns organizational tendencies in favor of the complete absence of explicit hierarchy. Important groups and individuals associated with Post left anarchy include: CrimethInc, the magazine Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed and its editor Jason McQuinn, Bob Black, Hakim Bey and others. For more information, see Infoshop.org's ''Anarchy After Leftism''ref ref section, and the on ''See also:'' Post left anarchy
'''Post structuralism''' The term postanarchism was originated by Saul Newman, first receiving popular attention in his book ''From Bakunin to Lacan'' to refer to a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought. Subsequent to Newman's use of the term, however, it has taken on a life of its own and a wide range of ideas including autonomism, post left anarchy, situationism, post colonialism and Zapatismo. By its very nature post anarchism rejects the idea that it should be a coherent set of doctrines and beliefs. As such it is difficult, if not impossible, to state with any degree of certainty who should or shouldn't be grouped under the rubric. Nonetheless key thinkers associated with post anarchism include Saul Newman, Todd May, Gilles Deleuze and F lix Guattari. ''External reference: Postanarchism Clearinghouse''ref ref ''See also'' Post anarchism
'''Insurrectionary anarchism''' Insurrectionary anarchism is a form of revolutionary anarchism critical of formal anarchist labor unions and federations. Insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organization, including small affinity groups, carrying out acts of resistance in various struggles, and mass organizations called base structures, which can include exploited individuals who are not anarchists. Proponents include Wolfi Landstreicher and Alfredo M. Bonanno, author of works including "Armed Joy" and "The Anarchist Tension". This tendency is represented in the US in magazines such as Willful Disobedience and Killing King Abacus. ''See also:'' Insurrectionary anarchism
'''Small 'a' anarchism''' '''Small 'a' anarchism''' is a term used in two different, but not unconnected contexts. Dave Neal posited the term in opposition to big 'A' Anarchism in the article . While big 'A' Anarchism referred to ideological Anarchists, small 'a' anarchism was applied to their methodological counterparts those who viewed anarchism as "a way of acting, or a historical tendency against illegitimate authority." As an anti ideological position, small 'a' anarchism shares some similarities with post left anarchy. David Graeber and Andrej Grubacic offer an alternative use of the term, applying it to groups and movements organising according to or acting in a manner consistent with anarchist principles of decentralisation, voluntary association, mutual aid, the network model, and crucially, "the rejection of any idea that the end justifies the means, let alone that the business of a revolutionary is to seize state power and then begin imposing one's vision at the point of a gun."
Other issues
'''Conceptions of an anarchist society''' Many political philosophers justify support of the state as a means of regulating violence, so that the destruction caused by human conflict is minimized and fair relationships are established. Anarchists argue that pursuit of these ends does not justify the establishment of a state many argue that the state is incompatible with those goals and the ''cause'' of chaos, violence, and war. Anarchists argue that the state helps to create a monopoly on violence, and uses violence to advance elite interests. Much effort has been dedicated to explaining how anarchist societies would handle criminality.''See also:'' Anarchism and Society
'''Civil rights and cultural sovereignty''' Black anarchism opposes the existence of a state, capitalism, and subjugation and domination of people of color, and favors a non hierarchical organization of society. Theorists include Ashanti Alston, Lorenzo Komboa Ervin, and Sam Mbah. Anarchist People of Color was created as a forum for non caucasian anarchists to express their thoughts about racial issues within the anarchist movement, particularly within the United States. National anarchism is a political view which seeks to unite cultural or ethnic preservation with anarchist views. Its adherents propose that those preventing ethnic groups (or races) from living in separate autonomous groupings should be resisted. Anti Racist Action is not an anarchist group, but many anarchists are involved. It focuses on publicly confronting racist agitators. The Zapatista movement of Chiapas, Mexico is a cultural sovereignty group with some anarchist proclivities.
'''Neocolonialism and Globalization''' Nearly all anarchists oppose neocolonialism as an attempt to use economic coercion on a global scale, carried out through state institutions such as the World Bank, World Trade Organization, Group of Eight, and the World Economic Forum. Globalization is an ambiguous term that has different meanings to different anarchist factions. Most anarchists use the term to mean neocolonialism and or cultural imperialism (which they may see as related). Many are active in the anti globalization movement. Others, particularly anarcho capitalists, use "globalization" to mean the worldwide expansion of the division of labor and trade, which they see as beneficial so long as governments do not intervene.
'''Parallel structures''' Many anarchists try to set up alternatives to state supported institutions and "outposts," such as Food Not Bombs, infoshops, educational systems such as home schooling, neighborhood mediation arbitration groups, and so on. The idea is to create the structures for a new anti authoritarian society in the shell of the old, authoritarian one.
'''Technology''' Recent technological developments have made the anarchist cause both easier to advance and more conceivable to people. Many people use the Internet to form on line communities. Intellectual property is undermined and a gift culture supported by sharing music files, open source programming, and the free software movement. These cyber communities include the GNU, Linux, Indymedia, and Wiki. ! NEEDS SOURCE THAT E GOLD IS USED BY ANARCHISTS Public key cryptography has made anonymous digital currencies such as e gold and Local Exchange Trading Systems an alternative to statist fiat money. Some anarchists see information technology as the best weapon to defeat authoritarianism. Some even think the information age makes eventual anarchy inevitable.ref ref ''See also'': Crypto anarchism and Cypherpunk.
'''Pacifism''' Some anarchists consider Pacifism (opposition to war) to be inherent in their philosophy. anarcho pacifists take it further and follow Leo Tolstoy's belief in non violence. Anarchists see war as an activity in which the state seeks to gain and consolidate power, both domestically and in foreign lands, and subscribe to Randolph Bourne's view that "war is the health of the state"ref ref. A lot of anarchist activity has been anti war based.
'''Parliamentarianism''' In general terms, the anarchist ethos opposes voting in elections, because voting amounts to condoning the state.ref ref. Voluntaryism is an anarchist school of thought which emphasizes "tending your own garden" and "neither ballots nor bullets." The anarchist case against voting is explained in ''The Ethics of Voting''ref ref by George H. Smith. (Also see "Voting Anarchists: An Oxymoron or What?" by Joe Peacott, and writings by Fred Woodworth).
'''Sectarianism''' Most anarchist schools of thought are, to some degree, sectarian. There is often a difference of opinion ''within'' each school about how to react to, or interact with, other schools. Some, such as panarchists, believe that it is possible for a variety of modes of social life to coexist and compete. Some anarchists view opposing schools as a social impossibility and resist interaction others see opportunities for coalition building, or at least temporary alliances for specific purposes. ''See anarchism without adjectives.''
Criticisms of anarchism
:''Main article:'' Criticisms of anarchism
'''Violence.''' Since anarchism has often been associated with violence and destruction, some people have seen it as being too violent. On the other hand hand, Frederick Engels criticsed anarchists for not being violent enough:
:''"A revolution is certainly the most authoritarian thing there is it is the act whereby one part of the population imposes its will upon the other part by means of rifles, bayonets and cannon authoritarian means, if such there be at all and if the victorious party does not want to have fought in vain, it must maintain this rule by means of the terror which its arms inspire in the reactionists. Would the Paris Commune have lasted a single day if it had not made use of this authority of the armed people against the bourgeois?"ref ref
'''Utopianism.''' Anarchism is often criticised as unfeasible, or plain utopian, even by many who agree that it's a nice idea in principle. For example, Carl Landauer in his book ''European Socialism'' criticizes anarchism as being unrealistically utopian, and holds that government is a "lesser evil" than a society without "repressive force." He holds that the belief that "ill intentions will cease if repressive force disappears" is an "absurdity."refLandauer, Carl. ''European Socialism: A History of Ideas and Movements'' (1959) (retrieved from "Anarchist Theory FAQ" by Bryan Caplan on January 27 2006 ref However, it must be noted that not all anarchists have such a utopian view of anarchism. For example, some, such as Benjamin Tucker, advocate privately funded institutions that defend individual liberty and property. However, other anarchists, such as Sir Herbert Read, proudly accept the characterization "utopian."
'''Class character.''' Marxists have characterised anarchism as an expression of the class interests of the petite bourgeoisie or perhaps the lumpenproletariat. See e.g. PlekhanovrefG. V. Plekhanov ''""'' ref for a Marxist critique of 1895. Anarchists have also been characterised as spoilt middle class dilettantes, most recently in relation to anti capitalist protesters.
'''Tacit authoritarianism.''' In recent decades anarchism has been criticised by 'situationists', 'post anarchists' and others of preserving 'tacitly statist', authoritarian or bureaucratic tendencies behind a dogmatic facade.ref Paragraph 91 ref
'''Hypocrisy.''' Some critics point to the sexistrefJenny P. d'Hericourt, ''""'' ref and racist views of some prominent anarchists, notably Proudhon and Bakunin, as examples of hypocrisy inherent within anarchism. While many anarchists, however, dismiss that the personal prejudices of 19th century theorists influence the beliefs of present day anarchists, others criticise modern anarchism for continuing to be eurocentric and reference the impact of anarchist thinkers like Proudhon on fascism through groups like Cercle Proudhon.ref ref Anarcho capitalist Bryan Caplan argues that the treatment of fascists and suspected fascist sympathizers by Spanish Anarchists in the Spanish Civil War was a form of illegitimate coercion, making the proffessed anarchists "ultimately just a third faction of totalitarians," alongside the communists and fascists. He also criticizes the willingness of the CNT to join the (statist) Republican government during the civil war, and references Stanley G. Payne's book on the Franco regime which claims that the CNT entered negotiations with the fascist government six years after the war.refCaplan, Bryan. ''""'' ref
Cultural phenomena
(1928 )
The kind of anarchism that is most easily encountered in popular culture is represented by celebrities who publicly identify themselves as anarchists. Although some anarchists reject any focus on such famous living individuals as inherently litist, the following figures are examples of prominent publicly self avowed anarchists:
the MIT professor of Linguistics Noam Chomsky
the science fiction author Ursula K. Le Guin
the social historian Howard Zinn
entertainer and author Hans Alfredsson
the Avant garde artist Nicol s Rossell
In Denmark, the Freetown Christiania was created in downtown Copenhagen. The housing and employment crisis in most of Western Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like the one still thriving in Barcelona, in Catalonia. Militant resistance to neo Nazi groups in places like Germany, and the uprisings of autonomous Marxism, situationist, and Autonomist groups in France and Italy also helped to give popularity to anti authoritarian, non capitalist ideas.
In various musical styles, anarchism rose in popularity. Most famous for the linking of anarchist ideas and music has been punk rock, although in the modern age, hip hop, and folk music are also becoming important mediums for the spreading of the anarchist message. In the UK this was associated with the punk rock movement the band Crass is celebrated for its anarchist and pacifist ideas. The Dutch punk band The Ex further exemplifies this expression.
''For further details, see anarcho punk''
See also
! (Please take care in adding to this list that it not grow excessively large, consider adding to the list of anarchist concepts page)
There are many concepts relevant to the topic of anarchism, this is a brief summary. There is also a more extensive list of anarchist concepts.
individualist anarchism, anarcho communism, anarcho syndicalism, anarcho capitalism, mutualism, Christian anarchism, anarcha feminism, green anarchism, nihilist anarchism, anarcho nationalism, black anarchism, national anarchism. post anarchism, post left anarchism
Libertarian Socialism
Anarchist symbolism
List of anarchism links
List of anarchists
List of anarchist organizations
Major conflicts within anarchist thought
Past and present anarchist communities
Historical events
Paris Commune (1871)
Haymarket Riot (1886)
The Makhnovschina (1917 1921)
Kronstadt rebellion (1921)
Spanish Revolution (1936) (see Anarchism in Spain and Spanish Revolution)
May 1968, France (1968)
WTO Meeting in Seattle (1999)
Books
The following is a sample of books that have been referenced in this page, a more complete list can be found at the list of anarchist books.
Mikhail Bakunin, ''God and the State''
Emma Goldman, ''Anarchism Other Essays''
Peter Kropotkin, ''Mutual Aid''
Pierre Joseph Proudhon, ''What is Property?''
Rudolf Rocker, ''Anarcho Syndicalism''
Murray Rothbard ''The Ethics of Liberty''
Max Stirner, ''The Ego And Its Own''
Leo Tolstoy, ''The Kingdom of God is Within You''
Anarchism by region culture
African Anarchism
Anarchism in Spain
Anarchism in the English tradition
Chinese anarchism
References
div style "font size: 85 "
references
div
'''These notes have no corresponding reference in the article. They might be re used.'''
Yarros, Victor ''Liberty'' VII, January 2 1892.
External links
The overwhelming diversity and number of links relating to anarchism is extensively covered on the links subpage.
Blogs by Anarchists.
extensively archives information relating to famous anarchists. This includes many of their books and other publications.
Hundreds of anarchists are listed, with short bios, links dedicated pages
(wikipedia page)
! Attention! The external link portion of this article regularly grows far beyond manageable size. Please only list an outside link if it applies to anarchism in general and is somewhat noteworthy. Links to lesser known sites or submovements will be routinely moved to the list page to keep this article free of clutter
Anarchism
Anarchism
Anarchism
Anarchism
ar:
ast:Anarquismu
bg:
bs:Anarhizam
ca:Anarquisme
cs:Anarchismus
da:Anarkisme
de:Anarchismus
eo:Anarkiismo
es:Anarquismo
et:Anarhism
eu:Anarkismo
fa:
fi:Anarkismi
fr:Anarchisme
gl:Anarquismo
he:
hu:Anarchizmus
id:Anarkisme
is:Stj rnleysisstefna
it:Anarchismo
ja:
ko:
lt:Anarchizmas
nl:Anarchisme
nn:Anarkisme
no:Anarkisme
pl:Anarchizm
pt:Anarquismo
ro:Anarhism
ru:
sco:Anarchism
simple:Anarchism
sk:Anarchizmus
sl:Anarhizem
sr:
sv:Anarkism
th:
tr:Anar izm
zh:
zh min nan:Hui th ng t ch g
REDIRECT Geography of Afghanistan
REDIRECT Economy of Afghanistan
REDIRECT Altruism
REDIRECT Amoeboid
! NOTES:
1) Please do not convert the bullets to subheadings here as the table of contents would be too large in that case (for example, see the FAC).
2) Use ref note combos for all links and explicitly cited references
3) Reference anything you put here with notable references, as this subject tends to attract a lot of controversy.
DiseaseDisorder infobox
Name Childhood autism
ICD10 F84.0
ICD9
'''Autism''' is classified as a neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests itself in markedly abnormal social interaction, communication ability, patterns of interests, and patterns of behavior.
Although the specific etiology of autism is unknown, many researchers suspect that autism results from genetically mediated vulnerabilities to environmental triggers. And while there is disagreement about the magnitude, nature, and mechanisms for such environmental factors, researchers have found at least seven major genes prevalent among individuals diagnosed as autistic. Some estimate that autism occurs in as many as one United States child in 166, however the National Institute of Mental Health gives a more conservative estimate of one in 1000. For families that already have one autistic child, the odds of a second autistic child may be as high as one in twenty. Diagnosis is based on a list of psychiatric criteria, and a series of standardized clinical tests may also be used.
Autism may not be physiologically obvious. A complete physical and neurological evaluation will typically be part of diagnosing autism. Some now speculate that autism is not a single condition but a group of several distinct conditions that manifest in similar ways.
By definition, autism must manifest delays in "social interaction, language as used in social communication, or symbolic or imaginative play," with "onset prior to age 3 years", according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The ICD 10 also says that symptoms must "manifest before the age of three years." There have been large increases in the reported incidence of autism, for reasons that are heavily debated by researchers in psychology and related fields within the scientific community.
Some children with autism have improved their social and other skills to the point where they can fully participate in mainstream education and social events, but there are lingering concerns that an absolute cure from autism is impossible with current technology. However, many autistic children and adults who are able to communicate (at least in writing) are opposed to attempts to cure their conditions, and see such conditions as part of who they are.
History
frame right Dr. Hans Asperger described a form of autism in the 1940s that later became known as Asperger's syndrome.
The word ''autism'' was first used in the English language by Swiss psychiatrist Eugene Bleuler in a 1912 number of the ''American Journal of Insanity''. It comes from the Greek word for "self".
However, the classification of autism did not occur until the middle of the twentieth century, when in 1943 psychiatrist Dr. Leo Kanner of the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore reported on 11 child patients with striking behavioral similarities, and introduced the label ''early infantile autism''. He suggested "autism" from the Greek (''autos''), meaning "self", to describe the fact that the children seemed to lack interest in other people. Although Kanner's first paper on the subject was published in a (now defunct) journal, ''The Nervous Child'', almost every characteristic he originally described is still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders.
At the same time an Austrian scientist, Dr. Hans Asperger, described a different form of autism that became known as Asperger's syndromebut the widespread recognition of Asperger's work was delayed by World War II in Germany, and by the fact that his seminal paper wasn't translated into English for almost 50 years. The majority of his work wasn't widely read until 1997.
Thus these two conditions were described and are today listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM IV TR (fourth edition, text revision 1) as two of the five pervasive developmental disorders (PDD), more often referred to today as autism spectrum disorders (ASD). All of these conditions are characterized by varying degrees of difference in communication skills, social interactions, and restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior.
Few clinicians today solely use the DSM IV criteria for determining a diagnosis of autism, which are based on the absence or delay of certain developmental milestones. Many clinicians instead use an alternate means (or a combination thereof) to more accurately determine a diagnosis.
Terminology
When referring to someone diagnosed with autism, the term ''autistic'' is often used. However, the term ''person with autism'' can be used instead. This is referred to as ''person first terminology''. The autistic community generally prefers the term ''autistic'' for reasons that are fairly controversial. This article uses the term ''autistic'' (see talk page).
Characteristics
introduced the label ''early infantile autism'' in 1943.
There is a great diversity in the skills and behaviors of individuals diagnosed as autistic, and physicians will often arrive at different conclusions about the appropriate diagnosis. Much of this is due to the sensory system of an autistic which is quite different from the sensory system of other people, since certain stimulations can affect an autistic differently than a non autistic, and the degree to which the sensory system is affected varies wildly from one autistic person to another.
Nevertheless, professionals within pediatric care and development often look for early indicators of autism in order to initiate treatment as early as possible. However, some people do not believe in treatment for autism, either because they do not believe autism is a disorder or because they believe treatment can do more harm than good.
Social development
Typically, developing infants are social beingsearly in life they do such things as gaze at people, turn toward voices, grasp a finger, and even smile. In contrast, most autistic children prefer objects to faces and seem to have tremendous difficulty learning to engage in the give and take of everyday human interaction. Even in the first few months of life, many seem indifferent to other people because they avoid eye contact and do not interact with them as often as non autistic children.
Children with autism often appear to prefer being alone to the company of others and may passively accept such things as hugs and cuddling without reciprocating, or resist attention altogether. Later, they seldom seek comfort from others or respond to parents' displays of anger or affection in a typical way. Research has suggested that although autistic children are attached to their parents, their expression of this attachment is unusual and difficult to interpret. Parents who looked forward to the joys of cuddling, teaching, and playing with their child may feel crushed by this lack of expected attachment behavior.
Children with autism appear to lack "theory of mind", the ability to see things from another person's perspective, a behavior cited as exclusive to human beings above the age of five and, possibly, other higher primates such as adult gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos. Typical 5 year olds can develop insights into other people's different knowledge, feelings, and intentions, interpretations based upon social cues (e.g., gestures, facial expressions). An individual with autism seems to lack these interpretation skills, an inability that leaves them unable to predict or understand other people's actions. The social alienation of autistic and Asperger's people is so intense from childhood that many of them have imaginary friends as companionship. However, having an imaginary friend is not necessarily a sign of autism and also occurs in non autistic children.
Although not universal, it is common for autistic people to not regulate their behavior. This can take the form of crying or verbal outbursts that may seem out of proportion to the situation. Individuals with autism generally prefer consistent routines and environments they may react negatively to changes in them. It is not uncommon for these individuals to exhibit aggression, increased levels of self stimulatory behavior, self injury or extensive withdrawal in overwhelming situations.
Sensory system
A key indicator to clinicians making a proper assessment for autism would include looking for symptoms much like those found in sensory integration dysfunction. Children will exhibit problems coping with the normal sensory input. Indicators of this disorder include oversensitivity or underreactivity to touch, movement, sights, or sounds physical clumsiness or carelessness poor body awareness a tendency to be easily distracted impulsive physical or verbal behavior an activity level that is unusually high or low not unwinding or calming oneself difficulty learning new movements difficulty in making transitions from one situation to another social and or emotional problems delays in speech, language or motor skills specific learning difficulties delays in academic achievement.
One common example is an individual with autism hearing. A person with Autism may have trouble hearing certain people while other people are louder than usual. Or the person with autism may be unable to filter out sounds in certain situations, such as in a large crowd of people (see cocktail party effect). However, this is perhaps the part of the autism that tends to vary the most from person to person, so these examples may not apply to every autistic.
It should be noted that sensory difficulties, although reportedly common in autistics, are not part of the DSM IV diagnostic criteria for ''autistic disorder''.
Communication difficulties
By age 3, typical children have passed predictable language learning milestones one of the earliest is babbling. By the first birthday, a typical toddler says words, turns when he or she hears his or her name, points when he or she wants a toy, and when offered something distasteful, makes it clear that the answer is "no." Speech development in people with autism takes different paths. Some remain mute throughout their lives while being fully literate and able to communicate in other waysimages, sign language, and typing are far more natural to them. Some infants who later show signs of autism coo and babble during the first few months of life, but stop soon afterwards. Others may be delayed, developing language as late as the teenage years. Still, inability to speak does not mean that people with autism are unintelligent or unaware. Once given appropriate accommodations, many will happily converse for hours, and can often be found in online chat rooms, discussion boards or websites and even using communication devices at autism community social events such as Autreat.
Those who do speak often use language in unusual ways, retaining features of earlier stages of language development for long periods or throughout their lives. Some speak only single words, while others repeat the same phrase over and over. Some repeat what they hear, a condition called echolalia. Sing song repetitions in particular are a calming, joyous activity that many autistic adults engage in. Many people with autism have a strong tonal sense, and can often understand spoken language.
Some children may exhibit only slight delays in language, or even seem to have precocious language and unusually large vocabularies, but have great difficulty in sustaining typical conversations. The "give and take" of non autistic conversation is hard for them, although they often carry on a monologue on a favorite subject, giving no one else an opportunity to comment. When given the chance to converse with other autistics, they comfortably do so in "parallel monologue"taking turns expressing views and information. Just as "neurotypicals" (people without autism) have trouble understanding autistic body languages, vocal tones, or phraseology, people with autism similarly have trouble with such things in people without autism. In particular, autistic language abilities tend to be highly literal people without autism often inappropriately attribute hidden meaning to what people with autism say or expect the person with autism to sense such unstated meaning in their own words.
The body language of people with autism can be difficult for other people to understand. Facial expressions, movements, and gestures may be easily understood by some other people with autism, but do not match those used by other people. Also, their tone of voice has a much more subtle inflection in reflecting their feelings, and the auditory system of a person without autism often cannot sense the fluctuations. What seems to non autistic people like a high pitched, sing song, or flat, robot like voice is common in autistic children. Some autistic children with relatively good language skills speak like little adults, rather than communicating at their current age level, which is one of the things that can lead to problems.
Since non autistic people are often unfamiliar with the autistic body language, and since autistic natural language may not tend towards speech, autistic people often struggle to let other people know what they need. As anybody might do in such a situation, they may scream in frustration or resort to grabbing what they want. While waiting for non autistic people to learn to communicate with them, people with autism do whatever they can to get through to them. Communication difficulties may contribute to autistic people becoming socially anxious or depressed.
Repetitive behaviors
Although people with autism usually appear physically normal and have good muscle control, unusual repetitive motions, known as self stimulation or "stimming," may set them apart. These behaviors might be extreme and highly apparent or more subtle. Some children and older individuals spend a lot of time repeatedly flapping their arms or wiggling their toes, others suddenly freeze in position. As children, they might spend hours lining up their cars and trains in a certain way, not using them for pretend play. If someone accidentally moves one of these toys, the child may be tremendously upset. Autistic children often need, and demand, absolute consistency in their environment. A slight change in any routinein mealtimes, dressing, taking a bath, or going to school at a certain time and by the same routecan be extremely disturbing. People with autism sometimes have a persistent, intense preoccupation. For example, the child might be obsessed with learning all about vacuum cleaners, train schedules or lighthouses. Often they show great interest in different languages, numbers, symbols or science topics. Repetitive behaviors can also extend into the spoken word as well. Perseveration of a single word or phrase, even for a specific number of times can also become a part of the child's daily routine.
Effects in education
Children with autism are affected with these symptoms every day. These unusual characteristics set them apart from the everyday normal student. Because they have trouble understanding people s thoughts and feelings, they have trouble understanding what their teacher may be telling them. They do not understand that facial expressions and vocal variations hold meanings and may misinterpret what emotion their instructor is displaying. This inability to fully decipher the world around them makes education stressful. Teachers need to be aware of a student's disorder so that they are able to help the student get the best out of the lessons being taught.
Some students learn better with visual aids as they are better able to understand material presented this way. Because of this, many teachers create visual schedules for their autistic students. This allows the student to know what is going on throughout the day, so they know what to prepare for and what activity they will be doing next. Some autistic children have trouble going from one activity to the next, so this visual schedule can help to reduce stress.
Research has shown that working in pairs may be beneficial to autistic children. ! cite a source here, please! Autistic students have problems in schools not only with language and communication, but with socialization as well. They feel self conscious about themselves and many feel that they will always be outcasts. By allowing them to work with peers they can make friends, which in turn can help them cope with the problems that arise. By doing so they can become more integrated into the mainstream environment of the classroom.
A teacher's aide can also be useful to the student. The aide is able to give more elaborate directions that the teacher may not have time to explain to the autistic child. The aide can also facilitate the autistic child in such a way as to allow them to stay at a similar level to the rest of the class. This allows a partially one on one lesson structure so that the child is still able to stay in a normal classroom but be given the extra help that they need.
There are many different techniques that teachers can use to assist their students. A teacher needs to become familiar with the child s disorder to know what will work best with that particular child. Every child is going to be different and teachers have to be able to adjust with every one of them.
Students with Autism Spectrum Disorders typically have high levels of anxiety and stress, particularly in social environments like school. If a student exhibits aggressive or explosive behavior, it is important for educational teams to recognize the impact of stress and anxiety. Preparing students for new situations by writing Social Stories can lower anxiety. Teaching social and emotional concepts using systematic teaching approaches such as The Incredible 5 Point Scale or other Cognitive Behavioral strategies can increase a student's ability to control excessive behavioral reactions.
DSM definition
Autism is defined in section 299.00 of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM IV) as:
A total of six (or more) items from (1), (2) and (3), with at least two from (1), and one each from (2) and (3):
qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifested by at least two of the following:
marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors such as eye to eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures to regulate social interaction
failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental level
a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or achievements with other people (e.g., by a lack of showing, bringing, or pointing out objects of interest)
lack of social or emotional reciprocity
qualitative impairments in communication as manifested by at least one of the following:
delay in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language (not accompanied by an attempt to compensate through alternative modes of communication such as gesture or mime)
in individuals with adequate speech, marked impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others
stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language
lack of varied, spontaneous make believe play or social imitative play appropriate to developmental level
restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities, as manifested by at least one of the following:
encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or focus
apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional routines or rituals
stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (e.g., hand or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole body movements)
persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
Delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas, with onset prior to age 3 years: (1) social interaction, (2) language as used in social communication, or (3) symbolic or imaginative play.
The disturbance is not better accounted for by Rett's Disorder or Childhood Disintegrative Disorder.
The ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual''! 's diagnostic criteria in general is controversial for being vague and subjective. (See the DSM cautionary statement.) The criteria for autism is much more controversial and some clinicians today may ignore it completely, instead solely relying on other methods for determining the diagnosis.
Types of autism
Autism presents in a wide degree, from those who are nearly dysfunctional and apparently mentally handicapped to those whose symptoms are mild or remedied enough to appear unexceptional ("normal") to the general public. In terms of both classification and therapy, autistic individuals are often divided into those with an IQ80 referred to as having "low functioning autism" (LFA), while those with IQ80 are referred to as having "high functioning autism" (HFA). Low and high functioning are more generally applied to how well an individual can accomplish activities of daily living, rather than to IQ. The terms low and high functioning are controversial and not all autistics accept these labels. Further, these two labels are not currently used or accepted in autism literature.
This discrepancy can lead to confusion among service providers who equate IQ with functioning and may refuse to serve high IQ autistic people who are severely compromised in their ability to perform daily living tasks, or may fail to recognize the intellectual potential of many autistic people who are considered LFA. For example, some professionals refuse to recognize autistics who can speak or write as being autistic at all, because they still think of autism as a communication disorder so severe that no speech or writing is possible.
As a consequence, many "high functioning" autistic persons, and autistic people with a relatively high IQ, are underdiagnosed, thus making the claim that "autism implies retardation" self fulfilling. The number of people diagnosed with LFA is not rising quite as sharply as HFA, indicating that at least part of the explanation for the apparent rise is probably better diagnostics.
Asperger's and Kanner's syndrome
In the current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM IV TR), the most significant difference between Autistic Disorder (Kanner's) and Asperger's syndrome is that a diagnosis of the former includes the observation of " d elays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas, with onset prior to age 3 years: (1) social interaction, (2) language as used in social communication, or (3) symbolic or imaginative play , " while a diagnosis of Asperger's syndrome observes "no clinically significant delay" in these areas.
The DSM makes no mention of level of intellectual functioning, but the fact that Asperger's autistics as a group tend to perform better than those with Kanner's autism has produced a popular conception that ''Asperger's syndrome'' is synonymous with "higher functioning autism," or that it is a lesser disorder than ''autism''. There is also a popular but not necessarily true conception that all autistic individuals with a high level of intellectual functioning have Asperger's autism or that both types are merely geeks with a medical label attached. Also, autism has evolved in the public understanding, but the popular identification of autism with relatively severe cases as accurately depicted in ''Rain Man'' has encouraged relatives of family members diagnosed in the autistic spectrum to speak of their loved ones as having Asperger's syndrome rather than autism.
Autism as a spectrum disorder
Another view of these disorders is that they are on a continuum known as autistic spectrum disorders. A related continuum is Sensory Integration Dysfunction, which is about how well we integrate the information we receive from our senses. Autism, Asperger's syndrome, and Sensory Integration Dysfunction are all closely related and overlap.
There are two main manifestations of classical autism, regressive autism and early infantile autism. Early infantile autism is present at birth while regressive autism begins before the age of 3 and often around 18 months. Although this causes some controversy over when the neurological differences involved in autism truly begin, some believe that it is only a matter of when an environmental toxin triggers the disorder. This triggering could occur during gestation due to a toxin that enters the mother's body and is transfered to the fetus. The triggering could also occur after birth during the crucial early nervous system development of the child due to a toxin directly entering the child's body.
Increase in diagnoses of autism
.
There has been an explosion worldwide in reported cases of autism over the last ten years, which is largely reminiscent of increases in the diagnosis of schizophrenia and multiple personality disorder in the twentieth century. This has brought rise to a number of different theories as to the nature of the sudden increase.
Epidemiologists argue that the rise in diagnoses in the United States is partly or entirely attributable to changes in diagnostic criteria, reclassifications, public awareness, and the incentive to receive federally mandated services. A widely cited study from the M.I.N.D. Institute in California (17 October 2002), claimed that the increase in autism is real, even after those complicating factors are accounted for (see reference in this section below).
Other researchers remain unconvinced (see references below), including Dr. Chris Johnson, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio and cochair of the American Academy of Pediatrics Autism Expert Panel, who says, "There is a chance we're seeing a true rise, but right now I don't think anybody can answer that question for sure." (Newsweek reference below).
The answer to this question has significant ramifications on the direction of research, since a ''real increase'' would focus more attention (and research funding) on the search for environmental factors, while ''little or no real increase'' would focus more attention to genetics. On the other hand, it is conceivable that certain environmental factors (vaccination, diet, societal changes) may have a particular impact on people with a specific genetic constitution. There is little public research on the effects of in vitro fertilization on the number of incidences of autism.
One of the more popular theories is that there is a connection between "geekdom" and autism. This is hinted, for instance, by a ''Wired Magazine'' article in 2001 entitled "The Geek Syndrome", which is a point argued by many in the autism rights movement. This article, many professionals assert, is just one example of the media's application of mental disease labels to what is actually variant normal behaviorthey argue that shyness, lack of athletic ability or social skills, and intellectual interests, even when they seem unusual to others, are not in themselves signs of autism or Asperger's syndrome. Others assert that it is actually the medical profession which is applying mental disease labels to children who in the past would have simply been accepted as a little different or even labeled 'gifted'. See clinomorphism for further discussion of this issue.
Due to the recent publicity surrounding autism and autistic spectrum disorders, an increasing number of adults are choosing to seek diagnoses of high functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome in light of symptoms they currently experience or experienced during childhood. Since the cause of autism is thought to be at least partly genetic, a proportion of these adults seek their own diagnosis specifically as follow up to their children's diagnoses. Because autism falls into the pervasive developmental disorder category, strictly speaking, symptoms must have been present in a given patient before age seven in order to make a differential diagnosis.
Therapies
Sociology
Due to the complexity of autism, there are many facets of sociology that need to be considered when discussing it, such as the culture which has evolved from autistic persons connecting and communicating with one another. In addition, there are several subgroups forming within the autistic community, sometimes in strong opposition to one another.
Community and politics
Much like many other controversies in the world, the autistic community itself has splintered off into several groups. Essentially, these groups are those who seek a cure for autism, dubbed ''pro cure'', those who do not desire a cure for autism and as such resist it, dubbed ''anti cure'', and the many people caught in the middle of the two. In recent history, with scientists learning more about autism and possibly coming closer to a cure, some members of the "anti cure" movement sent a letter to the United Nations demanding to be treated as a minority group rather than a group with a mental disability or disease. Websites such as autistics.org present the view of the anti cure group.
There are numerous resources available for autistics from many groups. Due to the fact that many autistics find it easier to communicate online than in person, many of these resources are available online. In addition, sometimes successful autistic adults in a local community will help out children with autism, much in the way a master would help out an apprentice, for example.
2002 was declared Autism Awareness Year in the United Kingdomthis idea was initiated by Ivan and Charika Corea, parents of an autistic child, Charin. Autism Awareness Year was led by the British Institute of Brain Injured Children, Disabilities Trust, National Autistic Society, Autism London and 800 organizations in the United Kingdom. It had the personal backing of British Prime Minister Tony Blair and parliamentarians of all parties in the Palace of Westminster.
Culture
With the recent increases in autism recognition and new approaches to educating and socializing autistics, an ''autistic culture'' has begun to develop. Similar to deaf culture, autistic culture is based in a belief that autism is a unique way of being and not a disorder to be cured. There are some commonalities which are specific to autism in general as a culture, not just "autistic culture".
It is a common misperception that people with autism do not marry many do get married. Often, they marry another person with autism, although this is not always the case. Many times autistics are attracted to other autistics due to shared interests or obsessions, but more often than not the attraction is due to simple compatibility with personality types, the same as is true for non autistics. Autistics who communicate have explained that companionship is as important to autistics as it is to anyone else. Multigenerational autistic families have also recently become a bit more common.
The interests of autistic people and so called "geeks" or "nerds" can often overlap as autistic people can sometimes become preoccupied with certain subjects, much like the variant normal behavior geeks experience. However, in practice many autistic people have difficulty with working in groups, which impairs them even in the most "technical" of situations.
Autistic adults
thumb right Temple Grandin, one of the more successful adults with autism.
smallPhotograph courtesy Joshua Nathaniel Pritikin and William Lawrence Jarrold. small
Some autistic adults are able to work successfully in mainstream jobs, usually those with high functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome. Nevertheless, communication and social problems often cause difficulties in many areas of the autistic's life. Other autistics are capable of employment in sheltered workshops under the supervision of managers trained in working with persons with disabilities. A nurturing environment at home, at school, and later in job training and at work, helps autistic people continue to learn and to develop throughout their lives. Some argue that the internet allows autistic individuals to communicate and form online communities, in addition to being able to find occupations such as independent consulting, which does generally not require much human interaction offline.
In the United States, the public schools' responsibility for providing services ends when the autistic person is in their 20s, depending on each state. The family is then faced with the challenge of finding living arrangements and employment to match the particular needs of their adult child, as well as the programs and facilities that can provide support services to achieve these goals.
Autistic savants
The autistic savant phenomenon is sometimes seen in autistic people. The term is used to describe a person who is autistic and has extreme talent in a certain area of study. Although there is a common association between savants and autism (an association created by the 1988 film ''Rain Man''), most autistic people are not savants. Mental calculators and fast programming skills are the most common form. The famous example is Daniel Tammet, the subject of the documentary film ''The Brain Man'' (Kim Peek, one of the inspirations for Dustin Hoffman's character in the film ''Rain Man'', is not autistic). "Bright Splinters of the Mind" is a book that explores this issue further.
Other pervasive developmental disorders
Autism and Asperger's syndrome are just two of the five pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs). The three other pervasive developmental disorders are Rett syndrome, Childhood disintegrative disorder, and Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. Some of these are related to autism, while some of them are entirely separate conditions.
Rett syndrome
Rett syndrome is relatively rare, affecting almost exclusively females, one out of 10,000 to 15,000. After a period of normal development, sometime between 6 and 18 months, autism like symptoms begin to appear. The little girl's mental and social development regresses she no longer responds to her parents and pulls away from any social contact. If she has been talking, she stops she cannot control her feet she wrings her hands. Some of these early symptoms may be confused for autism. Some of the problems associated with Rett syndrome can be treated. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy can help with problems of coordination, movement, and speech.
Scientists sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development have discovered that a mutation in the sequence of a single gene causes Rett syndrome, and can physically test for it with a 80 accuracy rate . Rett syndrome in the past was sometimes classified as an autistic spectrum disorder, however most scientists agree that Rett syndrome is a separate developmental disorder and not part of the autistic spectrum .
Childhood disintegrative disorder
Childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD, and sometimes abbreviated as CHDD also) is a condition appearing in 3 or 4 year old children who have developed normally until age 2. Over several months, the child will deteriorate in intellectual, social, and language functioning from previously normal behaviour. This long period of normal development before regression helps differentiate CDD from Rett syndrome (and in fact it must be differentiated from autism in testing). The cause for CDD is unknown (thus it may be a spectrum disorder) but current evidence suggests it has something to do with the central nervous system .
Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, or PDD NOS, is referred to as a ''subthreshold'' condition because it is a classification which is given to someone who suffers from impairments in social interaction, communication, and or stereotyped behaviour but does not meet the criteria for one of the other four pervasive developmental disorders. Unlike the other four pervasive developmental disorders, PDD NOS has no specific guidelines for diagnosis, so the person may have a lot of characteristics of an autistic person, or few to none at all. Note that pervasive developmental disorder is not a diagnosis, just a term to refer to the five mentioned conditions, while PDD NOS is an official diagnosis .
See also
'''General'''
: Autism therapies
: Causes of autism
: Conditions comorbid to autism spectrum disorders
: Early Childhood Autism
: Heritability of autism
'''Groups'''
: Aspies For Freedom
: National Alliance for Autism Research
'''Controversy'''
: Controversies about functioning labels in the autism spectrum
: Controversies in autism
: Ethical challenges to autism treatment
'''Lists'''
: List of autism related topics
: List of fictional characters on the autistic spectrum
: List of autistic people
References
()
()
Manev R, Manev H. Aminoglycoside antibiotics and autism: a speculative hypothesis. BMC Psychiatry. 2001 1:5. Epub 2001 10 October.
Strock, Margaret (2004). Autism Spectrum Disorders (Pervasive Developmental Disorders). NIH Publication No. NIH 04 5511, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, 40 pp. http: www.nimh.nih.gov publicat autism.cfm
Footnotes
External links
'''General'''
:
: Autism Spectrum Disorder
: a website created to bring awareness of spectrum related disorders and forums for NT and ASD interaction.
: 'Teaching Students with Autism', Glen Dunlap, Lise Fox, ERIC Digest (October, 1999)
: Describes new discoveries about autism, autistics speaking for themselves.
: A website created from the perspective of a person who has two siblings who are on the Autism Spectrum with the goal of giving information to anybody who is seeking it.
''Blogs''
: By Adelle Jameson Tilton, About.com
:
: By a health professional who is the mother of an autistic boy.
:
: By Argues that there are common misconceptions about autism.
: By Katherine Lee, mother of an autistic son.
''Organizations''
: A web community for those on the autism spectrum with an emphasis on support and advocacy
: Clearinghouse for information relating to autism, particularly the biomedical treatment approach
: Autism Society of America
: Clearinghouse for information related to autism, from a non cure standpoint. Many articles by autistics.
: , Autism Research Institute (founded by Bernard Rimland)
''Resources''
: Resources and information for parents.
: Treatment Tips for Children with Autism, PDD Asperger's Syndrome.
: Information about and resource guide for behavioral intervention for autism
: Offering information and links regarding the developmental disabilities autism and Asperger's Syndrome.
: Parents educators discuss all views.
: 'everything you need to know about autism', Autism Today
: Selection of documentaries, interviews, etc.
: 'PARIS: Public Autism Resource Information Service' (directory of UK autism services)
: Measure Your Autism Spectrum Quotient
: Quiz that measures autistic traits
Category:Autism
Category:Childhood psychiatric disorders
Category:Disability
Category:Communication disorders
Category:Mental illness diagnosis by DSM and ISCDRHP
Category:Neurological disorders
de:Autismus
es:Autismo
eo:A tismo
fr:Autisme
ko:
ia:Autismo
it:Autismo
he:
ka:
hu:Autizmus
ms:Autisme
nl:Autisme
ja:
no:Autisme
pl:Autyzm wczesnodzieci cy
pt:Autismo
simple:Autism
sk:Autizmus (uzavretos )
sr:
fi:Autismi
sv:Autism
ta:
tr:Otizm
zh:
REDIRECT All Saints
REDIRECT Alchemy
'''Albedo''' is the measure of reflectivity of a surface or body. It is the ratio of electromagnetic radiation (EM radiation) reflected to the amount incident upon it. The fraction, usually expressed as a percentage from 0 to 100 , is an important concept in climatology and astronomy. This ratio depends on the frequency of the radiation considered: unqualified, it refers to an average across the spectrum of visible light. It also depends on the angle of incidence of the radiation: unqualified, normal incidence. Fresh snow albedos are high: up to 90 . The ocean surface has a low albedo. The average albedo of Earth is about 30 whereas the albedo of the Moon is about 7 . In astronomy, the albedo of satellites and asteroids can be used to infer surface composition, most notably ice content. Enceladus, a moon of Saturn, has the highest known albedo of any body in the solar system, with 99 of EM radiation reflected.
Human activities have changed the albedo (via forest clearance and farming, for example) of various areas around the globe. However, quantification of this effect is difficult on the global scale: it is not clear whether the changes have tended to increase or decrease global warming.
The "classical" example of albedo effect is the snow temperature feedback. If a snow covered area warms and the snow melts, the albedo decreases, more sunlight is absorbed, and the temperature tends to increase. The converse is true: if snow forms, a cooling cycle happens. The intensity of the albedo effect depends on the size of the change in albedo and the amount of insolation for this reason it can be potentially very large in the tropics.
Some examples of albedo effects
Fairbanks, Alaska
According to the National Climatic Data Center's GHCN 2 data, which is composed of 30 year smoothed climatic means for thousands of weather stations across the world, the college weather station at Fairbanks, Alaska, is about 3 C (5 F) warmer than the airport at Fairbanks, partly because of drainage patterns but also largely because of the lower albedo at the college resulting from a higher concentration of pine trees and therefore less open snowy ground to reflect the heat back into space. Neunke and Kukla have shown that this difference is especially marked during the late winter months, when solar radiation is greater.
The tropics
Although the albedo temperature effect is most famous in colder regions of Earth, because more snow falls there, it is actually much stronger in tropical regions because in the tropics there is consistently more sunlight. When Brazilian ranchers cut down dark, tropical rainforest trees to replace them with even darker soil in order to grow crops, the average temperature of the area appears to increase by an average of about 3 C (5 F) year round, which is a significant amount.
Small scale effects
Albedo works on a smaller scale, too. People who wear dark clothes in the summertime put themselves at a greater risk of heatstroke than those who wear white clothes.
Pine forests
The albedo of a pine forest at 45 N in the winter in which the trees cover the land surface completely is only about 9 , among the lowest of any naturally occurring land environment. This is partly due to the color of the pines, and partly due to multiple scattering of sunlight within the trees which lowers the overall reflected light level. Due to light penetration, the ocean's albedo is even lower at about 3.5 , though this depends strongly on the angle of the incident radiation. Dense swampland averages between 9 and 14 . Deciduous trees average about 13 . A grassy field usually comes in at about 20 . A barren field will depend on the color of the soil, and can be as low as 5 or as high as 40 , with 15 being about the average for farmland. A desert or large beach usually averages around 25 but varies depending on the color of the sand. Reference: Edward Walker's study in the Great Plains in the winter around 45 N .
Urban areas
Urban areas in particular have very unnatural values for albedo because of the many human built structures which absorb light before the light can reach the surface. In the northern part of the world, cities are relatively dark, and Walker has shown that their average albedo is about 7 , with only a slight increase during the summer. In most tropical countries, cities average around 12 . This is similar to the values found in northern suburban transitional zones. Part of the reason for this is the different natural environment of cities in tropical regions, e.g., there are more very dark trees around another reason is that portions of the tropics are very poor, and city buildings must be built with different materials. Warmer regions may also choose lighter colored building materials so the structures will remain cooler.
Trees
Because trees tend to have a low albedo, removing forests would tend to increase albedo and thereby cool the planet. Cloud feedbacks further complicate the issue. In seasonally snow covered zones, winter albedos of treeless areas are 10 to 50 higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily.
Studies by the Hadley Centre have investigated the relative (generally warming) effect of albedo change and (cooling) effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests. They found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool new forests in high latitudes (e.g. Siberia) were neutral or perhaps warming .
Snow
Snow albedos can be as high as 90 . This is for the ideal example, however: fresh deep snow over a featureless landscape. Over Antarctica they average a little more than 80 .
If a marginally snow covered area warms, snow tends to melt, lowering the albedo, and hence leading to more snowmelt (the ice albedo feedback). This is the basis for predictions of enhanced warming in the polar and seasonally snow covered regions as a result of global warming.
Clouds
Clouds are another source of albedo that play into the global warming equation. Different types of clouds have different albedo values, theoretically ranging from a minimum of near 0 to a maximum in the high 70s. Climate models have shown that if the whole Earth were to be suddenly covered by white clouds, the surface temperatures would drop to a value of about 150 C ( 240 F). This model, though it is far from perfect, also predicts that to offset a 5 C (9 F) temperature change due to an increase in the magnitude of the greenhouse effect, "all" we would need to do is increase the Earth's overall albedo by about 12 by adding more white clouds.
Albedo and climate in some areas are already affected by artificial clouds, such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner traffic. A study following the September 11 attacks, after which all major airlines in the U.S. shut down for three days, showed a local 1 C increase in the daily temperature range (the difference of day and night temperatures) (''see: contrail'').
Aerosol effects
Aerosol (very fine particles droplets in the atmosphere) has two effects, direct and indirect. The direct (albedo) effect is generally to cool the planet the indirect effect (the particles act as CCNs and thereby change cloud properties) is less certain .
Black carbon
Another albedo related effect on the climate is from black carbon particles. The size of this effect is difficult to quantify: the IPCC say that their "estimate of the global mean radiative forcing for BC aerosols from fossil fuels is ... 0.2 W msup 2 sup (from 0.1 W msup 2 sup in the SAR)) with a range 0.1 to 0.4 W msup 2 sup". .
Category:Electromagnetic radiation
Category:Climatology
Category:Climate forcing
Category:Astrophysics
als:Albedo
bg:
bs:Albedo
ca:Albedo
cs:Albedo
da:Albedo
de:Albedo
et:Albeedo
es:Albedo
eo:Albedo
fr:Alb do
gl:Albedo
ko:
hr:Albedo
it:Albedo
he:
hu:Albed
nl:Weerkaatsingsvermogen
ja:
no:Albedo
nn:Albedo
pl:Albedo
pt:Albedo
ru:
sk:Albedo
sr:
fi:Albedo
sv:Albedo
uk:
'''Abu Dhabi''' (Arabic: ''Ab aby'') is the largest of the seven emirates that comprise the United Arab Emirates and was also the largest of the former Trucial States. '''Abu Dhabi''' is also a city of the same name within the Emirate that is the capital of the country, in north central UAE. The city lies on a T shaped island jutting into the Persian Gulf from the central western coast. An estimated 1,000,000 lived there in 2000, with about an 80 expatriate population. Abu Dhabi city is located at . Al Ain is Abu Dhabi's second largest urban area with a population of 348,000 (2003 census estimate) and is located 150 kilometres inland.
History
Parts of Abu Dhabi were settled as far back as the 3rd millennium BC and its early history fits the nomadic, herding and fishing pattern typical of the broader region. Modern Abu Dhabi traces its origins to the rise of an important tribal confederation the Bani Yas in the late 18th century, who also assumed control of Dubai. In the 19th century the Dubai and Abu Dhabi branches parted ways.
Into the mid 20th century, the economy of Abu Dhabi continued to be sustained mainly by camel herding, production of dates and vegetables at the inland oases of Al Ain and Liwa, and fishing and pearl diving off the coast of Abu Dhabi city, which was occupied mainly during the summer months. Most dwellings in Abu Dhabi city were, at this time constructed of palm fronds (barasti), with the better off families occupying mud huts. The growth of the cultured pearl industry in the first half of the 20th century created hardship for residents of Abu Dhabi as pearls represented the largest export and main source of cash earnings.
In 1939, Sheikh Shakhbut Bin Sultan Al Nahyan granted Petroleum concessions, and oil was first found in 1958. At first, oil money had a marginal impact. A few lowrise concete buildings were erected, and the first paved road was completed in 1961, but Sheikh Shakbut, uncertain whether the new oil royalties would last, took a cautious approach, prefering to save the revenue rather than investing it in development. His brother, Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahayan, saw that oil wealth had the potential to transform Abu Dhabi. The ruling Al Nahayan family decided that Sheikh Zayed should replace his brother as Ruler and carry out his vision of developing the country. On August 6, 1966, with the assistance of the British, Sheikh Zayed became the new ruler. See generally, Al Fahim, M, ''From Rags to Riches: A Story of Abu Dhabi'', Chapter Six (London Centre of Arab Studies, 1995), ISBN 1 900404 00 1.
With the announcement by Britain in 1968 that it would withdraw from the Gulf area by 1971, Sheikh Zayed became the main driving force behind the formation of the United Arab Emirates.
After the Emirates gained independence in 1971, oil wealth continued to flow to the area and traditional mud brick huts were rapidly replaced with banks, boutiques and modern highrises.
Current ruler
His Highness Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahayan is the hereditary emir and ruler of Abu Dhabi, as well as the current president of the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Postal History
Zaid, 1967.
Now part of the United Arab Emirates, '''Abu Dhabi''' was formerly the largest of the seven sheikdoms which made up the Trucial States on the so called Pirate Coast of eastern Arabia between Oman and Qatar. The Trucial States as a whole had an area of some 32,000 square miles of which Abu Dhabi alone had 26,000. The capital was the town of Abu Dhabi which is on an offshore island and was first settled in 1761.
The name Trucial States arose from treaties made with Great Britain in 1820 which ensured a condition of truce in the area and the suppression of piracy and slavery. The treaty expired on 31 December 1966. The decision to form the UAE was made on 18 July 1971 and the federation was founded on 1 August 1972, although the inaugural UAE stamps were not issued until 1 January 1973.
Oil production began on Das Island after prospecting during 1956 1960. Das Island is part of Abu Dhabi but lies well offshore, about 100 miles north of the mainland. Oil production on the mainland began in 1962. As a major oil producer, Abu Dhabi soon acquired massive financial wealth. Investment in long term construction projects and the establishment of a finance sector has led to the area becoming a centre of commerce which may well secure its lasting importance when the oil resources are exhausted.
In December 1960, postage stamps of British Postal Agencies in Eastern Arabia were supplied to the construction workers on Das Island but the postal service was administered via the agency office in Bahrain. The mail was also postmarked Bahrain so there was no clear indication that a letter had come from Das Island.
On 30 March 1963, a British agency was opened in Abu Dhabi and issued the agency stamps after the sheik objected to the use of the Trucial States definitives. Mail from Das Island continued to be administered by Bahrain but was now cancelled by an Abu Dhabi Trucial States postmark.
The first Abu Dhabi stamps were a definitive series of 30 March 1964 depicting Shaikh Shakhbut Bin Sultan Al Nahyan. There were eleven values under the Indian currency that was used of 100 naye paise 1 rupee. The range of values was 5 np to 10 rupees. Despite the introduction of these definitives, the British agency stamps remained valid in both Abu Dhabi and Das Island until the end of 1966 when they were withdrawn.
A post office was opened on Das Island on 6 January 1966 and this ended the Bahrain service. Mail from Das Island was now handled within Abu Dhabi.
When the treaty with Great Britain expired at the end of 1966, Abu Dhabi introduced a new currency of 1000 fils 1 dinar and took over its own postal administration, including the Das Island office. The earlier issues were subject to surcharges in this currency and replacement definitives were released depicting the new ruler Shaikh Zaid. Issues continued until introduction of UAE stamps in 1973.
In all, Abu Dhabi issued 95 stamps from 1964 to 1972, the final set being three views of the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.
'''Source''':
Climate
Sunny blue skies can be expected through out the year. The months June through September are generally hot and humid with temperatures averaging above 40 C(110 F). The weather is usually pleasant from October to May. January to February is cooler and may require the use of a light jacket. The oasis city of Al Ain enjoys cooler temperatures even through summer due to sporadic rainfall.
Transport
Abu Dhabi International Airport serves this city. The local time is GMT 4 hours.
Trivia
The cartoon cat Garfield would often put the kitten Nermal in a box and ship him to Abu Dhabi. A common phrase from Garfield is "Abu Dhabi is where all the cute kittens go." The reason is that the author of Garfield found out through over seas relations that the city of Abu Dhabi, and the majority of UAE, has a large amount of cats that roam wild. Many live around the suburbs.
See also
Mina' Zayid, the port of Abu Dhabi.
Al Ain
Marawah
Postal Authorities
Saudi Arabia
Transportation in the United Arab Emirates
External links
, Abu Dhabi Islands Archaeological Survey
, Guide to life in Abu Dhabi
Non Government Organisations
human rights and anti slavery organisation
Category:Capitals in Asia
Category:Cities in the United Arab Emirates
Category:Emirates
Category:Coastal cities
Category:Philately by country
ar:
bg:
bs:Abu Dhabi
ca:Abu Dhabi
da:Abu Dhabi
de:Abu Dhabi
et:Abu Dhabi emiraat
es:Abu Dhabi
eo:Abu Dabio
fr:Abu Dhabi
gl:Emirato de Abu Dabi
ko:
io:Abu Dhabi
id:Abu Dhabi
is:Ab Dab
it:Abu Dhabi
he:
lt:Abu Dabis
nl:Abu Dhabi
ja:
no:Abu Dhabi
nn:Abu Dhabi
pl:Abu Zabi
pt:Abu Dhabi
ru:
simple:Abu Dhabi
sk:Ab Zab (mesto)
fi:Abu Dhabi
sv:Abu Dhabi
uk:
zh:
REDIRECT Aardvark
REDIRECT Abacus
REDIRECT Abalone
REDIRECT Abbess
REDIRECT Abbey
REDIRECT Abbot
REDIRECT Abbreviation
REDIRECT Atlas Shrugged
REDIRECT Achilles
REDIRECT Adolf Hitler
REDIRECT Abdomen
REDIRECT Abdominal surgery
REDIRECT Abecedarian
REDIRECT Abensberg
REDIRECT Aardwolf
REDIRECT Arthur Koestler
REDIRECT Ayn Rand
REDIRECT Alexander the Great
REDIRECT Anchorage, Alaska
REDIRECT Andre Agassi
REDIRECT Academic elitism
REDIRECT Axiom of choice
REDIRECT American football
REDIRECT Anna Kournikova
REDIRECT Andorra
REDIRECT History of Andorra
The letter '''A''' is the first letter in the Latin alphabet. Its name in English is ''a'', plural ''aes,'' ''a's,'' or ''as''.
History
The letter A probably started as a pictogram of an ox head in Egyptian hieroglyphs or the Proto semitic alphabet.
align "center" cellspacing "10"
align "center"
br Egyptian hieroglyphbr ox head
br Proto semiticbr ox head
br Phoenician ''aleph''
br Greek ''alpha''
br Etruscan A
br Roman A
By 1600 BC, the Phoenician alphabet's letter had a linear form that served as the basis for all later forms. Its name must have corresponded closely to the Hebrew aleph. The name is also similar to the Arabic alif.
When the Ancient Greeks adopted the alphabet, they had no use for the glottal stop that the letter had denoted in Phoenician and other Semitic languages, so they used the sign for the vowel , and changed its name to alpha. In the earliest Greek inscriptions, dating to the 8th century BC, the letter rests upon its side, but in the Greek alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter, although many local varieties can be distinguished by the shortening of one leg, or by the angle at which the cross line is set.
The Etruscans brought the Greek alphabet to what was Italy and left the letter unchanged. The Romans later adopted the Etruscan alphabet to write Latin, and the resulting letter was preserved in the modern Latin alphabet used to write many languages, including English.
The letter has two minuscule (lower case) forms. The form used in most current handwriting consists of a circle and vertical stroke. Most printed material uses a form consisting of a small loop with an arc over it. Both derive from the majuscule (capital) form. In Greek handwriting, it was common to join the left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop, as demonstrated by the Uncial version below. Many fonts then made the right leg vertical. In some of these, the serif that began the right leg stroke developed into an arc, resulting in the printed form, while in others it was dropped, resulting in the modern handwritten form.
align "center" cellspacing "10"
align "center"
br Blackletter A
br Uncial A
align "center"
br Modern Roman A
br Modern Italic A
br Modern Script A
Usage
In English, the letter A by itself usually denotes the lax open front unrounded vowel () as in ''pad'', the open back unrounded vowel () as in ''father'', or, in concert with a later orthographic e, the diphthong (though the pronunciation varies with the dialect) as in ''ace'', due to effects of the Great vowel shift.
In most other languages that use the Latin alphabet, the letter A denotes either an open back unrounded vowel (), or an open central unrounded vowel ().
In the International Phonetic Alphabet, variants of the letter A denote various vowels. In X SAMPA, capital A denotes the open back unrounded vowel and lowercase a denotes the open front unrounded vowel.
A also is the English indefinite article, extended to an before a vowel.
Codes for computing
Letter
NATO Alpha
Morse
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
In Unicode the capital A is codepoint U 0041 and the lowercase a is U 0061.
In Hex, A is the character used to represent decimal 10, or in binary, 01010
The ASCII code for capital A is 65 and for lowercase a is 97 or in binary 01000001 and 01100001, correspondingly.
The EBCDIC code for capital A is 193 and for lowercase a is 129.
The numeric character references in HTML and XML are "tt 65 tt" and "tt 97 tt" for upper and lower case respectively.
Meanings for '''A'''
As a word see A, an
In American Major League Baseball, the Oakland Athletics are often simply referred to as the "'''A's'''."
In astronomy,
A stands for a January 1 through 15 discovery, in the provisional designation of a comet (e.g. C 1760 A1, the Great Comet of 1760) or asteroid (e.g. )
''a'' is often used to denote the semi major axis of an orbit
In biochemistry, A is the symbol for alanine and adenosine.
Brassiere cup size '''A'''
In calendars, A is often an abbreviation for the months April and August.
In computing,
tta tt is the HTML element for an anchor tag.
In Windows, Ctrl A, and Mac OS, Command A, selects all the text in the document, or all the pixels of an image.
A sometimes represents the set of all alphabetic characters within string patterns.
A: is the conventional address of the first floppy disk drive in CP M based operating systems such as DOS.
A is a security division ("Verified Protection") in the TCSEC.
In education, a grade of '''A''' typically represents the highest score that students can achieve. This is sometimes coupled with a plus minus sign, as in '''A ''' or '''A ''', or a number, as in '''A1'''. It is occasionally a grade one level below '''A ''' (pronounced "A Star").
In electronics,
A is a standard size of battery.
A refers to the Anode, or filament, component of a vacuum tube.
In English, the word ''a'' is an indefinite article, see A, an
In Esperanto, a is the adjectival attributive ending A is commonly an abbreviation meaning English (language).
In fiction, the letter worn by Hester Prynne marking her as an adultress in the Nathaniel Hawthorne novel ''The Scarlet Letter'' was an ''A''.
In film, ''A'' is an Italian film made in 1969 see ''A (film)''.
In finance, A is the U.S. ticker symbol for Agilent Technologies.
In games, the letter A is used to mark each of the Aces in a deck of playing cards.
In Greek, a is a prefix (''alpha privativum'') meaning "not" or "devoid of," used in many borrowed words in English, German and Romance languages.
In India ''A'' is movie rating, given to those intended to be seen only by adults.
In international licence plate codes, A stands for Austria.
In international paper sizes, A is a series of sizes with an aspect ratio of roughly 70 width to height, with A4 being an example popular size.
In logic,
the letter A is used as a symbol for the universal affirmative proposition in the general form "all x is y." The letters I, E, and O are used respectively for the particular affirmative "some x is y," the universal negative "no x is y," and the particular negative "some x is not y." The use of these letters is generally derived from the vowels of the two Latin verbs ''affirmo'' (or AIo), "I assert," and ''nego'', "I deny." The use of the symbols dates from the 13th century, though some authorities trace their origin to the Greek logicians.
In symbolic logic, the symbol (an inverted letter A) is the universal quantifier.
In mathematics,
A is often used as a digit meaning ''ten'' in hexadecimal and other positional numeral systems with a radix of 11 or greater,
blackboard bold math mathbb A math ( in Unicode) sometimes represents the algebraic numbers.
In the On Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, each sequence has an ID consisting of the letter A and six base 10 digits.
In medicine, '''A''' (also, '''A ''' or '''A ''') is one of the human blood types.
In music,
A is a Pitch class or note, see A (musical note).
A, or "side A," refers to the top or first side of a vinyl record.
''A'' is a British rock band see ''A (band)''.
''A'' is an album by Jethro Tull see ''A (album)''.
In nutrition, A is a vitamin.
In photography, most SLR cameras use A to signify aperture priority mode, where the user sets the aperture and the camera determines the shutter speed.
In poetry, A is the major work of influential 20th century author Louis Zukofsky.
In political theory, a circumscribed "A" is an anarchist symbol.
As the first letter of a postal code,
In Canada, A stands for Newfoundland and Labrador.
On the serial numbers of United States dollars, A identifies the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
In the SI system of units,
A is the symbol for the ampere or amp, the SI base unit of electric current.
a, atto, is the SI prefix meaning 10sup 18 sup
a is the symbol for the are, a unit of surface area equal to 100 square metres.
As a timezone, A is the military designation for Coordinated Universal Time 1, also known as CET or Central European Time.
See also
Alpha
Cyrillic A
big big
(Ae)
(Aa)
br clear "all"
Category:Latin letters
Category:Vowels
als:A
ar:A
bs:A
ca:A
cs:A
da:A
de:A
et:A
el:A
es:A
eo:A
fr:A
gl:A
ko:A
hr:A
io:A
id:A
it:A
he:A
kw:A
la:A
hu:A
nl:A
ja:A
no:A
nn:A
pl:A
pt:A
ro:A
ru: ( )
sq:A
scn:A
simple:A
sl:A
sr:A ( )
fi:A
sv:A
tl:A
vi:A
tr:A
yo:A
zh:A
REDIRECT Anarcho capitalism
REDIRECT An American in Paris
REDIRECT Automorphism
div style "float:right clear:right width:300px margin left: 1em "
US Confederate state
Name Alabama
Fullname State of Alabama
Flag Flag of Alabama.svg
Flaglink Flag of Alabama
Seal Alabama state seal.png
Map Map of USA highlighting Alabama.png
Nickname Camellia State, The Heart of Dixie, Yellowhammer State
Capital Montgomery
OfficialLang English
Languages English 96.7 , Spanish 2.2
LargestCity Birmingham
Governor Bob Riley (R)
Senators Richard Shelby (R)
Jeff Sessions (R)
PostalAbbreviation AL
AreaRank 30supth sup
TotalArea 52,423 mi 135,775
LandArea 50,750 mi 131,442
WaterArea 1,673 mi 4,333
PCWater 3.19
PopRank 23suprd sup
2000Pop 4,447,100
DensityRank 26supth sup
2000Density 33.84
AdmittanceOrder 22supnd sup
AdmittanceDate December 14, 1819
SecessionDate January 11, 1861
ReadmittanceDate July 14, 1868
TimeZone Central: UTC 6 DST 5
Latitude 30 13'N to 35 N
Longitude 84 51'W to 88 28'W
Width 190 mi 306
Length 330 mi 531
HighestElev Mount Cheaha 2,408 ft 734
MeanElev 499 ft 152
LowestElev 0 ft 0
ISOCode US AL
Website www.alabama.gov
thumb center 250px Alabama Cities and Urban Areas Sprawl
cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0" style "float:right clear:right width:300px margin:0 0 1em 1em " class "toccolours"
'''State motto''' ''Audemus jura nostra defendere''
'''State bird''' Yellowhammer
'''State flower''' Camellia
'''State song''' "Alabama"
'''State tree''' Longleaf Pine
'''State spirit''' Conecuh Ridge
'''State reptile''' Red bellied turtle
div
'''Alabama''' is a state located in the Southern United States.
History
''Main article: History of Alabama''
The memory of the Native American presence is particularly strong in Alabama. Among Native American people once living in present Alabama were Alabama (Alibamu), Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Koasati, and Mobile. Trade with the Northeast via the Ohio River began during the Burial Mound Period (1000 BC A.D. 700) and continued until European contact. Meso American influence is evident in the agrarian Mississippian culture that followed.
The French established the first European settlement in the state with the establishment of Mobile in 1702. Southern Alabama was French from 17021763, part of British West Florida from 17631780, and part of Spanish West Florida from 17801814. Northern and central Alabama was part of British Georgia from 17631783 and part of the American Mississippi territory thereafter. Its statehood delayed by the lack of a coastline (rectified when Andrew Jackson captured Spanish Mobile in 1814), Alabama became the 22nd state in 1819.
The state of Alabama seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861 and became the Alabama Republic and on February 18 1861 became a Confederate state. While not many battles were fought in the state, it contributed about 120,000 soldiers to the Civil War. After the war a provisional government was set up in 1865 and Alabama was officially readmitted to the Union on July 14 1868.
The cradle of the Confederacy during the Civil War, Alabama was at stage center in the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
Law and government
''Main article: Law and Government of Alabama''
Local County Government
Alabama has 67 counties, each having its own elected legislative branch, usually called the Board of Commissioners, which usually also has executive authority in the county. Due to the restraints placed in the Alabama Constitution, all but 7 counties (Jefferson, Lee, Mobile, Madison, Montgomery, Shelby, and Tuscaloosa) in the state have little to no home rule. Instead, most counties in the state have to lobby to the Local Legislation Committee the state legislature to get simple local policies such as waste disposal to land use zoning.
Alabama is an alcohol monopoly or Alcoholic beverage control state.
Political Climate
The current governor of the state is Bob Riley and the two U.S. senators are Jefferson B. Sessions III and Richard C. Shelby (all three from the Republican Party). The current Alabama Constitution was adopted in 1901.
During Reconstruction following the American Civil War, Alabama was occupied by federal troops of the Third Military District under General John Pope. In 1877, the Reconstruction period ended with the recognition of Rutherford B. Hayes as President elect. White Southerners assumed control of the government and passed laws to segregate and disenfranchise black residents. The state became part of the "Solid South," a one party system in which the Democratic Party became essentially the only political party in every Southern state. For nearly 100 years, local and state elections in Alabama were decided in the Democratic Party primary, with generally no Republican challenger running.
From 1876 through 1956, Alabama supported only Democratic presidential candidates, by margins as high as 73 percentage points. In 1960, Alabama gave most of its electoral votes to Harry F. Byrd as a protest. In 1964, the national Republican Party began to win more votes in the South by following a "Southern Strategy" which emphasized "states' rights" and the increasing liberalism of the national Democratic Party. The first such candidate was conservative Barry Goldwater, who became the first Republican candidate supported by Alabama. In 1968, Alabama supported native son and American Independent Party candidate George Wallace.
The last Democratic candidate to win Alabama's votes in a presidential election was Southerner Jimmy Carter in 1976. Today, the Republican party has become increasingly dominant in conservative Alabama politics. However, in local politics, Democrats still control many offices, including majorities in both houses of the Legislature, and registered Democrats outnumber Republicans in the state. In 2004, George W. Bush won Alabama's nine electoral votes by a margin of 25 percentage points with 62.5 of the vote. The only 11 counties voting Democratic were Black Belt counties, where African Americans are in the majority.
Alabama is located in the Bible Belt, and its educational policies reflect this. According to the Alan Guttmacher Institute, Alabama requires sex education classes to emphasize "that homosexuality is not an acceptable lifestyle to the general public and that homosexual conduct is a criminal offense under the laws of the state." While the mandate is not typically enforced in Alabama classrooms, it is unclear whether or not the official requirements have changed since the Supreme Court's ruling in Lawrence v. Texas. According to the United States Census Bureau, in 2000, Alabama was home to 4,561 same sex male couples and 4,167 same sex female couples.
U.S. presidential election, 2004, in Alabama
Geography
''Main article: Geography of Alabama''
Alabama is the 30supth sup largest state in the United States with 135,775 kmsup2 sup (52,423 misup2 sup) of total area. 3.19 of that is water, making Alabama 23suprd sup in the amount of surface water, also giving it the second largest inland waterway system in the United States. About three fifths of the land area is a gentle plain with a general incline towards the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico. The North Alabama region is mostly mountainous, with the Tennessee River cutting a large valley creating numerous creeks, streams, rivers, mountains, and lakes. The lowest point east of the Mississippi River lies in Dekalb County along a creek cutting tower ridges, and creating Buck's Pocket State Park. Another natural wonder is "Land Bridge" the longest natural bridge span east of the Mississippi River. Alabama generally ranges in elevation from sea level at Mobile Bay, to a little more than 1800 feet or 550 meters in the Appalachian mountains in the northeast. The highest point is Mount Cheaha.
Economy
According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the 2003 total gross state product was 132 billion. The per capita income for the state was 26,505 in 2003. Alabama's agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs, cattle, plant nursery items, peanuts, cotton, grains such as corn and sorgum, vegetables, milk, soybeans, and peaches. Even though neighboring Georgia is called the Peach State, Alabama produces twice as many peaches annually. Its industrial outputs include iron and steel products, including cast iron and steel pipe, paper, lumber, and wood products, mining (mostly coal), and plastic products, cars and trucks, and apparel. Also, Alabama produces aerospace and electronic products, mostly in the Huntsville area, home of the NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center and the US Army Missile Command, headquartered at Redstone Arsenal.
Also, the city of Mobile is a busy seaport on the Gulf of Mexico, and with inland waterway access to the Midwest via the Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway.
Demographics
class "toccolours" align "right" cellpadding "4" cellspacing "0" style "margin:0 0 1em 1em font size: 95 "
! colspan 2 bgcolor " ccccff" align "center" Historical populations
! align "center" Censusbryear !! align "right" Population
colspan 2 hr
align "center" 1800 align "right" 1,250
align "center" 1810 align "right" 9,046
align "center" 1820 align "right" 127,901
align "center" 1830 align "right" 309,527
align "center" 1840 align "right" 590,756
align "center" 1850 align "right" 771,623
align "center" 1860 align "right" 964,201
align "center" 1870 align "right" 996,992
align "center" 1880 align "right" 1,262,505
align "center" 1890 align "right" 1,513,401
align "center" 1900 align "right" 1,828,697
align "center" 1910 align "right" 2,138,093
align "center" 1920 align "right" 2,348,174
align "center" 1930 align "right" 2,646,248
align "center" 1940 align "right" 2,832,961
align "center" 1950 align "right" 3,061,743
align "center" 1960 align "right" 3,266,740
align "center" 1970 align "right" 3,444,165
align "center" 1980 align "right" 3,893,888
align "center" 1990 align "right" 4,040,587
align "center" 2000 align "right" 4,447,100
As of 2005, Alabama has an estimated population of 4,557,808, which is an increase of 32,433, or 0.7 , from the prior year and an increase of 110,457, or 2.5 , since the year 2000. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 77,418 people (that is 319,544 births minus 242,126 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 36,457 people into the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 25,936 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 10,521 people.
The state had 108,000 foreign born (2.4 of the state population), of which an estimated 22.2 were illegal aliens (24,000).
Race and ancestry
The racial makeup of the state and comparison to the prior census:
The largest reported ancestry groups in Alabama: American (17.0 ), English (7.8 ), Irish (7.7 ), German (5.7 ), and Scotch Irish (2.0 ). 'American' includes those reported as Native American or African American.
Religion
The major religions of Alabama:
Christian 92
Protestant 79
Baptist 49
Methodist 10
Presbyterian 3
Episcopalian 2
Church of God 2
Church of Christ 2
Pentecostal 2
Lutheran 2
Other Protestant 7
Catholic 13
Other religions 1
Non religious 7
Colleges and Universities (incomplete)
valign "top"
Alabama A M University
Alabama State University
Andrew Jackson University
Athens State University
Auburn University
Auburn University Montgomery
Birmingham Southern College
Bishop State Community College
Calhoun Community College System
Decatur Main Campus
Huntsville Cummings Research Park
Redstone Arsenal
Capps College
Concordia College Selma
Faulkner University
Heritage Christian University
Huntingdon College
Jacksonville State University
Judson College
Miles College
Oakwood College
Remington College
Samford University
Selma University
Southeastern Bible College
Southern Christian University
valign "top"
Spring Hill College
Stillman College
Talladega College
Troy University System (formerly "Troy State University System")
Main Campus (Troy)
Troy University at Dothan
Troy University at Montgomery
Troy University at Phenix City
Tuskegee University
United States Sports Academy
University of Alabama System
Main Campus (Tuscaloosa)
Birmingham
Huntsville
University of Mobile
University of Montevallo
University of North Alabama
University of South Alabama
University of West Alabama
Virginia College
Culture and interests
small
Famous Alabamians
Alabama Jubilee Hot Air Balloon Classic
Music of Alabama
Alabama Public Television, state wide public TV network
List of television stations in Alabama
Alabama Shakespeare Festival
Alabama Sports Festival
Spirit of America Festival
U.S. Space Rocket Center U.S. Space Camp
USS Alabama
Rickwood Field
Robert Trent Jones Golf Trail
Visionland Theme Park
Old State Bank
Vulcan statue
Mobile Bay jubilee
Point Mallard Aquatic Center
Noccalula Falls Park
small
References
Atkins, Leah Rawls, Wayne Flynt, William Warren Rogers, and David Ward. '''' (1994)
Flynt, Wayne. ''Alabama in the Twentieth Century'' (2004)
Owen Thomas M. ''History of Alabama and Dictionary of Alabama Biography'' 4 vols. 1921.
Jackson, Harvey H. ''Inside Alabama: A Personal History of My State'' (2004)
solid reporting on politics and economics 1960 72
Williams, Benjamin Buford. ''A Literary History of Alabama: The Nineteenth Century'' 1979.
WPA. ''Guide to Alabama'' (1939)
for a detailed bibliography see History of Alabama
External links
Official website.
Alabama Department of Tourism and Travel
Alabama Department of Archives and History
at the Archives Department site
Alabama National Guard
at the Alabama Legislature site
from the U.S. Census Bureau
Full color maps. List of cities, towns and county seats
from the Southern Literary Review
Notes
The phrase ''The Heart of Dixie'' is required by state law to be included on standard state vehicle license plates, but has recently been reduced to a very small size and eclipsed by the phrase ''Stars Fell on Alabama''.
Category:States of the United States
Category:1819 establishments
ang:Alabama
ar:
ast:Alabama
bg:
zh min nan:Alabama
bs:Alabama
ca:Alabama
cs:Alabama
cy:Alabama
da:Alabama
de:Alabama (Bundesstaat)
et:Alabama
es:Alabama
eo:Alabamo
fr:Alabama
ga:Alabama
gd:Alabama
gl:Alabama
ko:
hr:Alabama
io:Alabama
id:Alabama
is:Alabama
it:Alabama
he:
ka: ( )
la:Alabama
lv:Alabama
lt:Alabama
lb:Alabama (Bundesstaat)
jbo:alybamys
hu:Alabama
mk:
ms:Alabama
mo:
nl:Alabama
ja:
no:Alabama
nn:Alabama
os: ( )
pl:Alabama
pt:Alabama
ro:Alabama
ru: ( )
sq:Alabama
simple:Alabama
sk:Alabama
sl:Alabama
sr:
fi:Alabama
sv:Alabama
th:
tr:Alabama
uk: ( )
zh:
REDIRECT Africa
:''For other uses, see Achilles (disambiguation).''
In Greek mythology, '''''', transliterated to '''Akhilleus''' or '''Achilleus'' in Roman letters, Latinized from this ancient Greek to '''Achilles''', appearing in Etruscan as '''Achle''', was a hero (ancient Greek heros, "defender") of the Trojan War, the greatest and the most central character of Homer's ''Iliad''.
Name
The very first two lines of the ''Iliad'' read:
:
:
Transliterated:
:M nin aeide thea, P l iade Akhil os
:oulomen n, h muri' Akhaiois alge' eth ken,
Translated:
:Sing, Muse, the wrath of Achilles the son of Peleus,
:the destructive wrath, that brought countless griefs upon the Achaeans,
In these lines, we see the name Akhilleus Peleides, which is a praenomen and a patronymic, the latter being formed from Peleus with the suffix ides producing ''Achilles the son of Peleus''. The system is similar to the names used by Scandinavians before modern times, such as Leif Erikson.
Achilles' name can be analyzed as a combination of (''akhos'') "grief" and (''laos'') "a people, tribe, nation, etc." In other words, Achilles is an embodiment of the grief of the people, grief being a theme raised numerous times in the Iliad (frequently by Achilles). Achilles' role as the hero of grief forms an ironic juxtaposition with the conventional view of Achilles as the hero of ''kleos'' (glory, usually glory in war).
''Laos'' has been construed by Gregory Nagy, following Leonard Palmer, to mean ''a corps of soldiers''. With this derivation, the name would have a double meaning in the poem: When the hero is functioning rightly, his men bring grief to the enemy, but when wrongly, his men get the grief. The poem is in part about the misdirection of anger on the part of leadership.
Birth
Achilles was the son of the mortal Peleus, king of the Myrmidons in Phthia (southeast Thessaly), and the sea nymph Thetis. Zeus and Poseidon had been rivals for the hand of Thetis until Prometheus the fire bringer prophesized that Thetis would bear a son greater than his father. For this reason, the two gods withdrew their pursuit, and had her wed to Peleus.
When Achilles was born, according to the most common version of the myth, Thetis tried to make him immortal by dipping him in the river Styx. But she forgot to wet the heel she held him by, leaving him vulnerable at that spot. (See Achilles' tendon.) In an earlier and less popular version of the story, Thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire to burn away the mortal parts of his body. She was interrupted by Peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage. Homer does not make reference to this invulnerability in the Iliad. To the contrary, he mentions Achilles being wounded, although not seriously.
Peleus gave him (together with his young friend or lover Patroclus) to Chiron the Centaur, on Mt. Pelion, to be raised.
Achilles in the Trojan War
Telephus
When the Greeks left for the Trojan War, they accidentally stopped in Mysia, ruled by King Telephus. In the resulting battle, Achilles gave Telephus a wound that would not heal Telephus consulted an oracle, who stated that "he that wounded shall heal".
According to other reports in Euripides' lost play about Telephus, he went to Aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked Achilles to heal his wound. Achilles refused, claiming to have no medical knowledge. Alternatively, Telephus held Orestes for ransom, the ransom being Achilles' aid in healing the wound. Odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound therefore, the spear must be able to heal it. Pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound and Telephus was healed. This is an example of sympathetic magic.
During the Trojan War
.
In Homer's Iliad, Achilles is the only mortal to experience consuming rage (''menon''). His anger is at some times wavering, at other times absolute. The humanization of Achilles by the events of the war is an important theme of the ''Iliad''.
Achilles' charioteer's name was Automedon.
Troilus
According to Dares Phrygius' ''Account of the Destruction of Troy'' , while Troilus, the youngest son of Priam and Hecuba (whom some say was fathered by Apollo), was watering his horses at the Lion Fountain outside the walls of Troy, Achilles saw him and fell in love with his beauty (whose "loveliness of form" was described by Ibycus as being like "gold thrice refined"). The youth rejected his advances and took refuge inside the temple of Apollo. Achilles pursued him into the sanctuary and decapitated him on the god's own altar. (Tzetzes, scholiast on Lycophron). At the time, Troilus was said to be a year short of his twentieth birthday, and the legend goes that if Troilus had lived to be twenty, Troy would have been invincible. (First Vatican Mythographer)
Agamemnon and the death of Patroclus
and Achilles. Achilles bandages the arm of his friend Patroclus. The latter turns his head aside to avoid the sight of blood and of Achilles noticing his pain grimaces. The scene has been interpreted as an act of welfare and comradeship, or as a scene with sexual overtones. Ancient Greek culture often held the two to be lovers.
Achilles took 23 towns outside Troy, including Lyrnessos, where he captured Briseis to keep as a concubine. Meanwhile, Agamemnon took a woman named Chryseis and taunted her father, Chryses, a priest of Apollo, when he attempted to buy her back. Apollo sent a plague through the Greek armies, and Agamemnon was forced to give Chryseis back to her father however, he took Briseis away from Achilles as compensation for his loss.
This action sparked the central plot of the Iliad: Achilles becomes enraged and refuses to fight for the Greeks any further. The war goes badly, through the influence of Zeus, and the Greeks offer handsome reparations to their greatest warrior. After the Greeks are pushed back to the ships, which are just starting to be set on fire by the Trojan hero Hector, Achilles is visited by Odysseus, Ajax, and Phoenix, who attempt to persuade him to return to battle.
Achilles still refuses to fight, but agrees to allow Patroclus to fight in his place, wearing his armor. The next day, Patroclus is killed and stripped of the armor by Hector, who mistakes him for Achilles. Achilles is overwhelmed with grief for his beloved friend, and the rage he once harbored toward Agamemnon begins shifting to Hector. Thetis, his mother, rises from the sea floor and sympathizes with his grief. She obtains magnificent new armor for him from Hephaestus. The goddess Athena provides him with the aegis of Zeus.
When he goes to the battlefield, the entire Trojan army flees behind the walls of Troy. Achilles' wrath is terrible, and he slays many Trojan warriors and allies, including Priam's son Lycaon (whom Achilles had previously captured and sold into slavery, but who had been returned to Troy). Eventually Hector comes out of the walls to defend the honour of Troy. He asked Achilles to agree that the body of the loser would be returned for proper burial by the winner. Achilles rejected this arrangement, saying, "Though twenty ransoms and thy weight in gold were offered, I would refuse it all."
Stories tell that Hector ran about Troy seven times and Achilles followed him, however seeing that Achilles would not be outrun, Hector stood his ground and fought. Other versions of the tale say that Achilles chased after Hector two times, and one time he was delivered by the gods, however, on their second encounter, Achilles trapped Hector and challenged him. After a legendary fight, Achilles kills Hector.
Influenced by his anger, he drags the body of Hector behind his chariot round the walls of Troy three times, and refuses to allow it to receive funeral rites. Much to the dismay of Achilles, the body of Hector miraculously heals and will not decay as normally expected. Aphrodite, the goddess of love who sided with Troy throughout the whole conflict, put a protective barrier over Hector, which kept him looking like he did before he was viciously killed by Achilles. When Priam, the king of Troy and Hector's father, comes secretly into the Greek camp to plead for the body, Achilles finally relents in one of the most moving scenes of the ''Iliad'', he receives Priam graciously and allows him to take the body away. The scene is intensely moving because Priam, the king of one of the greatest cities in the known world, kneels down, old and frail as he is, and kisses the hands of the man who killed his son.
The greatness of Achilles lies in not just being the greatest Greek fighter ever, but in knowing the choice provided to him by Destiny. His mother Thetis had prophesied to him that if he pulled out of the Trojan War, he would enjoy a long and a happy life. If Achilles fought, however, he would die before the walls of Troy but assure an everlasting glory, surpassing that of all other heroes. He had made the choice, and coming face to face with it showed his greatness.
Xanthos
During the Trojan War, Xanthos, one of Achilles' horses, was rebuked by Achilles for allowing Patroclus to be killed. Xanthos responded by saying (Hera temporarily gave him voice to do so) that a god and a mortal had killed Patroclus and a god and a mortal would soon kill Achilles too.
Memnon, Cycnus, Penthesilea, and the death of Achilles
, English, 1778 Victoria and Albert Museum.
Shortly after the death of Hector, Achilles defeated Memnon of Ethiopia, Cycnus of Colonae and the Amazonian warrior Penthesilia (with whom Achilles also had an affair in some versions). As predicted by Hector with his dying breath, Achilles was thereafter killed by Paris either by an arrow to the heel (which may have subsequently become fatally infected, and is said to have been guided by Apollo), or in an older version by a knife to the back while visiting Polyxena, a princess of Troy. Both versions conspicuously deny the killer any sort of valor, and Achilles remains undefeated on the battlefield (Paris was later killed by Philoctetes using the enormous bow of Heracles). His bones are mingled with those of Patroclus, and funeral games are held. Like Ajax, he is represented (although not by Homer) as living after his death in the island of Leuke at the mouth of the Danube.
The fate of Achilles' armor
Achilles' armor was the object of a feud between Odysseus and Ajax the Greater (Achilles' older cousin). They competed for it and Odysseus won. Ajax went mad with grief and vowed to kill his comrades he started killing cattle (thinking they were Greek soldiers), and then himself.
Other stories about Achilles
Some post Homeric sources claim that in order to keep Achilles safe from the war, Thetis (or, in some versions, Peleus) hid the young man at the court of Lycomedes, king of Skyros. There, Achilles was disguised as a girl and lived among Lycomedes' daughters under the name "Pyrrha" (the red haired girl). With Lycomedes' daughter Deidamia, Achilles fathered a son, Neoptolemus (also called Pyrrhus, after his father's alias). According to this story, Odysseus learned from the prophet Calchas that the Achaeans would be unable to capture Troy without Achilles' aid. He went to Skyros in the guise of a peddler selling women's clothes and jewelry, but placed a shield and spear among his goods. When Achilles instantly took up the spear, Odysseus saw through his disguise and convinced him to join the Trojan campaign. In another version of the story, Odysseus arranged for a trumpet alarm to be sounded while he was with Lycomedes' women while the women fled in panic, Achilles prepared to defend the court, thus giving his identity away. The story about Achilles in drag is not found in Homer.
In Homer's ''Odyssey'', there is a passage in which Odysseus sails to the underworld and converses with the shades. One of these is Achilles, who when greeted as "blessed in life, blessed in death", responds that he would rather be a slave than be dead. This has been interpreted as a rejection of his warrior life, but also as indignity to his martyrdom being slighted.
The kings of Epirus claimed to be descended from Achilles through his son. Alexander the Great, son of the Epiran princess Olympias, could therefore also claim this descent, and in many ways strove to be like his great ancestor he is said to have visited his tomb while passing Troy. Achilles was worshipped as a sea god in many of the Greek colonies on the Black Sea.
The homosexual relationship between Achilles and Patroclus is something much explored in post Homeric literature. By the fifth and fourth centuries, the deep and arguably ambiguous friendship portrayed in Homer blossomed into an unequivocal love affair in the works of Aeschylus, Plato, and Aeschines, and seems to have inspired the enigmatic verses in Lycophron's third century ''Alexandra'' that claim Achilles slayed Troilus in a matter of unrequited love.
Achilles fought and killed the Amazon Helene.
Some also said he married Medea, and that after both their deaths they were united in the Elysian Fields of Hades as Hera promised Thetis in Apollonius' Argonautica.
Achilles in lost plays
In the early 1990s a lost play by Aeschylus was discovered in the wrappings of a mummy in Egypt. The play, ''Achilles'', was part of a trilogy about the Trojan War. It was known to exist due to mentions in ancient sources, but had been lost for over 2,000 years. Another lost play by Aeschylus, ''The Myrmidons'', focussed on the relationship between Achilles and Patroclus only a few lines survive today.
There is another lost play with Achilles as the main character, ''The Lovers of Achilles'', by Sophocles.
Spoken word myths (audio)
border "1" cellpadding "5" cellspacing "0"
! style "background: ffdead " Achilles myths as told by story tellers
'''1. Achilles and Patroclus,''' read by Timothy Carter
Bibliography of reconstruction: Homer ''Iliad,'' 9.308, 16.2, 11.780, 23.54 (700 BC) Pindar ''Olympian Odes,'' IX (476 BC) Aeschylus ''Myrmidons,'' F135 36 (495 BC) Euripides ''Iphigenia in Aulis,'' (405 BC) Plato ''Symposium,'' 179e (388 BC 367 BC) Statius ''Achilleid,'' 161, 174, 182 (96 CE)
Achilles in music
Achilles has frequently been mentioned in music.
"Achilles, Agony from the album ''The Triumph of Steel'', 1992, Atlantic Records.
"Achilles Last Stand", by Led Zeppelin from the album ''Presence'', 1976, Atlantic Records.
"Achilles' Revenge" is a song by Warlord.
Achilles' Heel is an album by the indie rock band Pedro the Lion.
Achilles and his heel are referenced in the song "Special K" by the rock band Placebo.
Achilles is referred to in Bob Dylan's song, "Temporary Like Achilles".
"Achilles' Heel" is a song by the UK band Toploader.
"Achilles" is a song by the Colorado based power metal band Jag Panzer, from the album ''Casting the Stones''.
Achilles is referenced in the Indigo Girls song "Ghost".
Achilles in film
The role of Achilles has been played by:
Stanley Baker in ''Helen of Troy'' (1956)
Arturo Dominici in ''La Guerra di Troia'' (1962)
Derek Jacobi voice in Achilles (Channel Four Television) (1995)
Steve Davislim in ''La Belle H l ne'' (TV, 1996)
Joe Montana in ''Helen of Troy'' (TV, 2003)
Brad Pitt in ''Troy'' (2004)
Namesakes
The Royal New Zealand Navy gave the name HMNZS ''Achilles'' to an ''A'' class destroyer which served in World War II.
References
Homer, ''Iliad''
Homer, ''Odyssey'' XI, 467 540
Apollodorus, ''Bibliotheca'' III, xiii, 5 8
Apollodorus, ''Epitome'' III, 14 V, 7
Ovid, ''Metamorphoses'' XI, 217 265 XII, 580 XIII, 398
Ovid, ''Heroides'' III
Apollonius Rhodius, ''Argonautica'' IV, 783 879
Dante, ''The Divine Comedy'', Inferno, V.
Bibliography
Ileana Chirassi Colombo, Heros Achilleus Theos Apollon. In ''Il Mito Greco'', d. Bruno Gentili
Anthony Edwards:
Achilles in the Underworld: Iliad, Odyssey, and thiopis , ''Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies'', 26 (1985): pp. 215 227
Achilles in the Odyssey: Ideologies of Heroism in the Homeric Epic , ''Beitrage zur klassischen Philologie'', 171, Meisenheim, 1985
Kleos Aphthiton and Oral Theory, ''Classical Quarterly'', 38 (1988): pp. 25 30
H l ne Monsacr , ''Les larmes d'Achille. Le h ros, la femme et la souffrance dans la po sie d'Hom re'', Paris, Albin Michel, 1984
Gregory Nagy:
''The Best of The Acheans: Concepts of the Hero in Archaic Greek Poetry'', Johns Hopkins University, 1999 (rev. edition)
''The Name of Achilles: Questions of Etymology and 'Folk Etymology''', ''Illinois Classical Studies'', 19, 1994
Dale S. Sinos, ''The Entry of Achilles into Greek Epic'', Ph.D. thesis, Johns Hopkins University
Johansson, Warren. ''Achilles.'' Dynes, Wayne R. (ed.), Garland Publishing, 1990. p. 8
External links
Category:People who fought in the Trojan War
Achilles
Category:Pederastic heroes and deities
! interwiki
ar:
bg:
ca:Aquil les
da:Achilleus
de:Achilleus
et:Achilleus
el:
es:Aquiles
eo:A ilo
fa:
fr:Achille
gl:Aquiles
ko:
hr:Ahilej
it:Achille
he:
la:Achilles
lt:Achilas
lb:Achilleus
hu:Akhilleusz
nl:Achilles
ja:
no:Akilles
pl:Achilles (mitologia)
pt:Aquiles
ru:
sk:Achilles
sl:Ahil
fi:Akhilleus
sv:Akilles
uk:
zh:
REDIRECT Applied statistics
:''For other uses of the name Abraham Lincoln, see Abraham Lincoln (disambiguation)''
Infobox President name Abraham Lincoln
nationality American
image Abraham Lincoln head on shoulders photo portrait.jpg
order 16th President
term start March 4, 1861
term end April 15, 1865
predecessor James Buchanan
successor Andrew Johnson
birth date February 12, 1809
birth place Hardin County, Kentucky (now in LaRue County)
death date April 15, 1865
death place Washington, D.C.
spouse Mary Todd Lincoln
party Republican
vicepresident Hannibal Hamlin (1861 to 1865) Andrew Johnson (March April 1865)
'''Abraham Lincoln''' (February 12, 1809 April 15, 1865), sometimes called '''Abe Lincoln''' and nicknamed '''Honest Abe''', the '''Rail Splitter''', and the '''Great Emancipator''', was the 16th President of the United States (1861 to 1865), and the first president from the Republican Party. Lincoln opposed the expansion of slavery and oversaw the Union war effort during the American Civil War. He selected the generals and approved their strategy selected senior civilian officials supervised diplomacy, patronage and party affairs rallied public opinion through messages and speeches such as the Gettysburg Address and took personal charge of plans for the abolition of slavery and the Reconstruction of the Union. He was assassinated as the war ended by John Wilkes Booth.
Role in history
President Lincoln was opposed to what he saw as the Slave Power and staunchly opposed its efforts to expand slavery into federal territories. His victory in the 1860 presidential election further polarized an already divided nation. Before his inauguration in March of 1861, seven Southern states seceded from the United States, formed the Confederate States of America, and took control of U.S. forts and other properties within their boundaries. These events soon led to the American Civil War.
Lincoln is often praised for his work as a wartime leader who proved adept at balancing competing considerations and at getting rival groups to work together toward a common goal. Lincoln had to negotiate between Radical and Moderate Republican leaders, who were often far apart on the issues, while attempting to win support from War Democrats and loyalists in the seceding states. He personally directed the war effort, in close cooperation (1864 65) with General Ulysses S. Grant which ultimately led the Union forces to victory over the Confederacy.
His leadership qualities were evident in his diplomatic handling of the border slave states at the beginning of the fighting, in his defeat of a congressional attempt to reorganize his cabinet in 1862, in his many speeches and writings which helped mobilize and inspire the North, and in his defusing of the peace issue in the 1864 presidential campaign. Copperheads vehemently criticized him for violating the Constitution, overstepping the bounds of executive power, refusing to compromise on slavery, declaring martial law, suspending habeas corpus, ordering the arrest of thousands of public officials and a number of newspaper publishers, and killing hundreds of thousands of young men. Radical Republicans criticized him for going too slow on abolition of slavery, and not being ruthless enough toward the conquered South.
Lincoln is most famous for his roles in preserving the Union and ending slavery in the United States with the Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. However, some abolitionists criticized him for only freeing the slaves under the Confederacy in 1863, and waiting until 1865 to free slaves held in the Union.
Historians have argued that Lincoln had a lasting influence on U.S. political and social institutions, importantly setting a precedent for greater centralization of powers in the federal government and the weakening of the powers of the individual state governments.
Lincoln spent most of his attention on military matters and politics but with his strong support his administration established the current system of national banks with the National Bank Act. He increased the tariff to raise revenue and encourage factories, imposed the first income tax, issued hundreds of millions of dollars of bonds and Greenbacks, encouraged immigration from Europe, built the transcontinental railroad, set up the Department of Agriculture, encouraged farm ownership with the Homestead Act of 1862, and set up the modern system of state universities with the Morrill Land Grant Colleges Act. During the war his Treasury department effectively controlled all cotton trade in the occupied South the most dramatic incursion of federal controls on the economy. During his administration West Virginia and Nevada were admitted as states.
Lincoln is usually ranked as one of the greatest presidents. Because of his roles in destroying slavery, redefining national values, and saving the Union, his assassination made him a martyr to millions of Americans. However, others considered him an unconstitutional tyrant for declaring martial law, suspending civil liberties, habeas corpus, and the First Amendment, and ordering the arrest of thousands of public officials and newspaper publishers.
Early life
Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, in a one room log cabin on the 348 acre (1.4 km) Sinking Spring Farm in the Southeast part of Hardin County, Kentucky, then considered the frontier (now part of LaRue Co., in Nolin Creek, three miles (5 km) south of Hodgenville), to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks. Lincoln was named after his deceased grandfather, who was scalped in 1786 in an Indian raid. He had no middle name. Lincoln's parents were uneducated, illiterate farmers. When Lincoln became famous, reporters and storytellers often exaggerated the poverty and obscurity of his birth. However Lincoln's father Thomas was a respected and relatively affluent citizen of the Kentucky backcountry. He had purchased the Sinking Spring Farm in December 1808 for 200 cash and assumption of a debt. His parents belonged to a Baptist church that had pulled away from a larger church because they refused to support slavery. From a very young age, Lincoln was exposed to anti slavery sentiment. However he never joined his parents' church, or any other church, and as a youth ridiculed religion.
Three years after purchasing the property, a prior land claim filed in Hardin Circuit Court forced the Lincolns to move. Thomas continued legal action until he lost the case in 1815. Legal expenses contributed to family difficulties. In 1811, they were able to lease 30 acres (0.1 km) of a 230 acre (0.9 km) farm on Knob Creek a few miles away, where they then moved. In a valley of the Rolling Fork River, this was some of the best farmland in the area. At this time, Lincoln's father was a respected community member and a successful farmer and carpenter. Lincoln's earliest recollections are from this farm. In 1815, another claimant sought to eject the family from the Knob Creek farm. Frustrated with litigation and lack of security provided by Kentucky courts, Thomas decided to move to Indiana, which had been surveyed by the federal government, making land titles more secure. It is possible that these episodes motivated Abraham to later learn surveying and become an attorney.
In 1816, when Lincoln was seven years old, he and his parents moved to Spencer County, Indiana, he would state "partly on account of slavery" and partly because of economic difficulties in Kentucky. In 1818, Lincoln's mother died of "milk sickness" at age thirty four, when Abe was nine. Soon afterwards, Lincoln's father remarried to Sarah Bush Johnston. Sarah Lincoln raised young Lincoln like one of her own children. Years later she compared Lincoln to her own son, saying "Both were good boys, but I must say both now being dead that Abe was the best boy I ever saw or ever expect to see." (''Lincoln'', by David Herbert Donald, 1995)
In 1830, after more economic and land title difficulties in Indiana, the family settled on government land on a site selected by Lincoln's father in Macon County, Illinois. The following winter was especially brutal, and the family nearly moved back to Indiana. When his father relocated the family to a nearby site the following year, the 22 year old Lincoln struck out on his own, canoeing down the Sangamon to Sangamon County, Illinois (now in Menard County), in the village of New Salem. Later that year, hired by New Salem businessman Denton Offutt and accompanied by friends, he took goods from New Salem to New Orleans via flatboat on the Sangamon, Illinois and Mississippi rivers. While in New Orleans, he may have witnessed a slave auction that left an indelible impression on him for the rest of his life. Whether he actually witnessed a slave auction at that time or not, living in a country with a considerable slave presence, he probably saw similar atrocities from time to time.
His formal education consisted of perhaps 18 months of schooling from itinerant teachers. In effect he was self educated, studying every book he could borrow. He mastered the Bible, Shakespeare, English history and American history, and developed a plain style that puzzled audiences more used to orotund oratory. He avoided hunting and fishing because he did not like killing animals even for food and, though unusually tall and strong, spent so much time reading that some neighbors thought he must be doing it to avoid strenuous manual labor. He was skilled with an axe they called him the "rail splitter" and a good wrestler.
Early career
Lincoln began his political career in 1832 at the age of 23 with a campaign for the Illinois General Assembly as a member of the Whig Party. The centerpiece of his platform was the undertaking of navigational improvements on the Sangamon River in the hopes of attracting steamboat traffic to the river, which would allow sparsely populated, poor areas along and near the river to grow and prosper. He served as a captain in a company of the Illinois militia drawn from New Salem during the Black Hawk War, although he never saw combat. He wrote after being elected by his peers that he had not had "any such success in life which gave him so much satisfaction."
He later tried and failed at several small time business ventures. He held an Illinois state liquor license and sold whiskey. Finally, after coming across the second volume of Sir William Blackstone's four volume ''Commentaries on the Laws of England'', he taught himself the law, and was admitted to the Illinois Bar in 1837. That same year, he moved to Springfield, Illinois and began to practice law with Stephen T. Logan. He became one of the most respected and successful lawyers in the prairie state, and grew steadily more prosperous. Lincoln served four successive terms in the Illinois House of Representatives, as a representative from Sangamon County, beginning in 1834. He became a leader of the Whig party in the legislature. In 1837 he made his first protest against slavery in the Illinois House, stating that the institution was "founded on both injustice and bad policy."
Lincoln shared a bed with Joshua Fry Speed from 1837 to 1841 in Springfield. While many historians claim it was not uncommon in the mid 19th century for men to share a bed (just as two men today may share a house or an apartment), gay activist C. A. Tripp generated controversy with his 2005 book ''The Intimate World of Abraham Lincoln'', which suggested their relationship may also have been sexual.
In 1841, Lincoln entered law practice with William Herndon, a fellow Whig. In 1856, both men joined the fledgling Republican Party. Following Lincoln's assassination, Herndon began collecting stories about Lincoln from those who knew him in central Illinois, eventually publishing a book, ''Herndon's Lincoln''. Lincoln never joined an antislavery society and denied he supported the abolitionists. He married into a prominent slave owning family from Kentucky, and allowed his children to spend time there surrounded by slaves. Several of his in laws became Confederate officers. He greatly admired the science that flourished in New England, and was perhaps the only father in Illinois at the time to send his son, Robert Todd Lincoln, to elite eastern schools, Phillips Exeter Academy and Harvard College.
Marriage
On November 4, 1842, at the age of 33, Lincoln married Mary Todd. The couple had four sons.
Robert Todd Lincoln: b. August 1, 1843, in Springfield, Illinois d. July 26, 1926, in Manchester, Vermont.
Edward Baker Lincoln: b. March 10, 1846, in Springfield, Illinois d. February 1, 1850, in Springfield, Illinois.
William Wallace Lincoln: b. December 21, 1850, in Springfield, Illinois d. February 20, 1862, in Washington, D.C.
Thomas (Tad) Lincoln: b. April 4, 1853, in Springfield, Illinois d. July 16, 1871, in Chicago, Illinois.
Only Robert survived into adulthood. Of Robert's three children, only Jessie Lincoln had any children (two: Mary Lincoln Beckwith and Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith). Neither Robert Beckwith nor Mary Beckwith had any children, so Abraham Lincoln's bloodline ended when Robert Beckwith (Lincoln's great grandson) died on December 24, 1985.
Illinois politics
In 1846, Lincoln was elected to one term in the U.S. House of Representatives. A staunch Whig, Lincoln often referred to party leader Henry Clay as his political idol. As a freshman House member, Lincoln was not a particularly powerful or influential figure in Congress. He used his office as an opportunity to speak out against the war with Mexico, which he attributed to President Polk's desire for "military glory that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood."
Lincoln was a key early supporter of Zachary Taylor's candidacy for the 1848 '''Whig Presidential nomination. When Lincoln's term ended, the incoming Taylor administration offered him the governorship of remote Oregon Territory. Acceptance would end his career in the fast growing state of Illinois, so he declined. Returning instead to Springfield, Illinois he turned''' most of his energies to making a living at the bar, which involved extensive travel on horseback from county to county.
Prairie lawyer
By the mid 1850s, Lincoln faced competing transportation interests both the river barges and the railroads. In 1849, he received a patent related to buoying vessels. Lincoln represented the Alton Sangamon Railroad in an 1851 dispute with one of its shareholders, James A. Barret. Barret had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to that corporation on the grounds that it had changed its originally planned route. Lincoln argued that as a matter of law a corporation is not bound by its original charter when that charter can be amended in the public interest, that the newer proposed Alton Sangamon route was superior and less expensive, and that accordingly the corporation had a right to sue Mr. Barret for his delinquent payment. He won this case, and the decision by the Illinois Supreme Court was eventually cited by several other courts throughout the United States.
Another important example of Lincoln's skills as a railroad lawyer was a lawsuit over a tax exemption that the state granted to the Illinois Central Railroad. McLean County argued that the state had no authority to grant such an exemption, and it sought to impose taxes on the railroad notwithstanding. In January 1856, the Illinois Supreme Court delivered its opinion upholding the tax exemption, accepting Lincoln's arguments.
Lincoln's most notable criminal trial came in 1858 when he defended William "Duff" Armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker. The case is famous for Lincoln's use of judicial notice, a rare tactic at that time, to show an eyewitness had lied on the stand, claiming he witnessed the crime in the moonlight. Lincoln produced a Farmer's Almanac to show that the moon on that date was at such a low angle it could not have produced enough illumination to see anything clearly. Based upon this evidence, Armstrong was acquitted.
Republican politics 1854 1860
The Kansas Nebraska Act of 1854, which expressly repealed the limits on slavery's spread that had been part of the Missouri Compromise of 1820, drew Lincoln back into politics.
Illinois Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, the most powerful man in the Senate, proposed popular sovereignty as the solution to the slavery impasse, incorporating it into the Kansas Nebraska Act. Douglas argued that in a democracy the people of a territory should decide whether to allow slavery or not, and not have a decision imposed on them by Congress.
It was a speech against Kansas Nebraska, on October 16, 1854 in Peoria, that caused Lincoln to stand out among the other free soil orators of the day. He helped form the new Republican party, drawing on remnants of the old Whig, Free Soil, Liberty and Democratic parties.
In a stirring campaign, the Republicans carried Illinois in 1854, and elected a senator. Lincoln was the obvious choice, but to keep party unity he allowed the election to go to his colleague Lyman Trumbull.
In 1857 58 Douglas broke with President Buchanan, leading to a terrific fight for control of the Democratic party. Some eastern Republicans even favored the reelection of Douglas in 1858, since he led the opposition to the administration's push for the Lecompton Constitution which would have admitted Kansas as a slave state. Accepting the Republican nomination for the Senate in 1858, Lincoln delivered a famous speech in which he stated, "A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved I do not expect the house to fall but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other." The speech created a lasting image of the danger of disunion due to slavery, and rallied Republicans across the north.
The 1858 campaign featured the Lincoln Douglas debates, a nationally noticed discussion on the issues that threatened to split the nation in two. Lincoln forced Douglas to propose his Freeport Doctrine, which lost him further support among slave holders and speeded the division of the Democratic Party. Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats and the legislature reelected Douglas to the Senate. Nevertheless, Lincoln's eloquence transformed him into a national political star.
During the debates of 1858 the issue of race was often discussed. During a time period when racial egalitarianism was considered politically incorrect, Stephen Douglas would inform the crowds, If you desire negro citizenship if you desire them to vote on an equality with yourselves then support Mr. Lincoln and the Black Republican party, who are in favor of the citizenship of the negro. On the defensive Lincoln countered that he was not in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races. Historians generally remained mixed on what Lincoln s actual views were on race. However, many tend to doubt that the highly political nature of these debates offer reliable evidence about his personal views. (Team of Rivals, by Doris Kearns Goodwin, 2005) (Lincoln: In Text and Context, by Donald Fehrenbacher, 1987) As Fredrick Douglass observed, Lincoln was the first great man that I talked with in the United States freely who in no single instance reminded me of the difference between himself and myself, of the difference of color. (Life and Times of Fredrick Douglass, by Fredrick Douglass, 1895)
Lincoln's opposition to slavery was opposition to the Slave Power, and he was not an abolitionist in 1858. But the Civil War changed everything, and changed Lincoln's beliefs in race relations as well.
Election of 1860
Entering the presidential nomination process as a distinct underdog, Lincoln was eventually chosen as the Republican candidate for the 1860 election for several reasons. His expressed views on slavery were seen as more moderate than rivals William H. Seward and Salmon Chase. His "western" origins also appealed to the newer states. Other contenders, especially those with more governmental experience, had acquired enemies within the party, specifically Seward, who had run afoul of newspaperman Horace Greeley. During the campaign, Lincoln was dubbed "The Rail Splitter" by Republicans to emphasize the power of "free labor," whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts.
On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected the 16th President of the United States, beating Democrat Douglas, John C. Breckenridge of the Southern Democrats, and John C. Bell of the new Constitutional Union Party. Lincoln was the first Republican president. He won entirely on the strength of his support in the North: he was not even on the ballot in nine states in the South and won only 2 of 996 counties there. Lincoln gained 1,865,908 votes (39.9 of the total,) for 180 electoral votes, Douglas 1,380,202 (29.5 ) for 12 electoral votes, Breckenridge 848,019 (18.1 ) for 72 electoral votes, and Bell 590,901 (12.5 ) for 39 electoral votes. There were fusion tickets in some states, but even if his opponents had combined in every state, Lincoln had a majority vote in all but two of the states in which he won the electoral votes, and would still have won the electoral college and the election.
Secession winter 1860 61
As Lincoln's election became more and more probable, secessionists made it clear that their states would leave the Union. South Carolina took the lead followed by six other cotton growing states: Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas. The upper South (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) listened to and rejected the secessionist appeal. They decided to stay in the Union, though warning Lincoln they would not support an invasion through their territory. The seven Confederate states seceded before Lincoln took office, declaring themselves an entirely new nation, the Confederate States of America. President Buchanan and president elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy.
President elect Lincoln survived an assassination threat in Baltimore, and on February 23, 1861 arrived in disguise in Washington. At Lincoln's inauguration on March 4, 1861, the Turners formed Lincoln's bodyguard and a sizable garrison of federal troops was also present, ready to protect the capital from Confederate invasion or insurrection from Confederates in the capital city.
, 1861 inauguration of Abraham Lincoln in front of U.S. Capitol
In his First Inaugural Address, Lincoln declared, "I hold that in contemplation of universal law and of the Constitution the Union of these States is perpetual. Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national governments", arguing further that the purpose of the United States Constitution was "to form a more perfect union" than the Articles of Confederation which were ''explicitly'' perpetual, and thus the Constitution too was perpetual. He asked rhetorically that even were the Constitution a simple contract, would it not require the agreement of all parties to rescind it?
Also in his inaugural address, in a final attempt to unite the Union and prevent the looming war, Lincoln supported the proposed Corwin Amendment to the constitution, of which he had been a driving force. It would have explicitly protected slavery in those states in which it already existed, and had already passed both houses. Lincoln adamantly opposed the Crittenden Compromise, however, which would have permitted slavery in the territories, renewing the boundary set by the Missouri Compromise and extending it to California. Despite support for this compromise among some Republicans, Lincoln declared that were the Crittenden Compromise accepted, it "would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people, tribe, and state owning a foot of land between here and Tierra del Fuego."
Because opposition to slavery expansion was the key issue uniting the Republican Party at the time, Lincoln is sometimes criticized for putting politics ahead of the national interest in refusing any compromise allowing the expansion of slavery. Supporters of Lincoln, however, point out that he did not oppose slavery because he was a Republican, but became a Republican because of his opposition to the expansion of slavery, that he opposed several other Republicans who were in favor of compromise, and that he clearly thought his course of action was in the national interest. By the time Lincoln took office the Confederacy was an established fact and not a single leader of that country ever proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. No compromise was found because no compromise was possible. Lincoln perhaps could have allowed the southern states to secede, and some Republicans recommended that. However conservative Democratic nationalists, such as Jeremiah S. Black, Joseph Holt, and Edwin M. Stanton had taken control of Buchanan's cabinet around January 1, 1861, and refused to accept secession. Lincoln, and nearly all Republican leaders, adopted this nationalistic position by March, 1861: the Union could not be broken.
War begins: 1861 1862
After Union troops at Fort Sumter were fired on and forced to surrender in April, Lincoln called on governors of every state to send 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect the capital, and "preserve the Union," which in his view still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states. Virginia, which had repeatedly warned Lincoln it would not allow an invasion of its territory or join an attack on another state, then seceded, along with North Carolina, Tennessee and Arkansas.
The slave states of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware did not secede, and Lincoln urgently negotiated with state leaders there, promising not to interfere with slavery in loyal states.
Emancipation Proclamation
draft on July 22, 1862.
Congress in July 1862 moved to free the slaves by passing the Second Confiscation Act. It provided:
:That if any person shall hereafter incite, set on foot, assist, or engage in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States, or the laws thereof, or shall give aid or comfort thereto, or shall engage in, or give aid and comfort to, any such existing rebellion or insurrection, and be convicted thereof, such person shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years, or by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars, and by the liberation of all his slaves, if any he have or by both of said punishments, at the discretion of the court.
:....
:SEC. 9. And be it further enacted, That all slaves of persons who shall hereafter be engaged in rebellion against the government of the United States, or who shall in any way give aid or comfort thereto, escaping from such persons and taking refuge within the lines of the army and all slaves captured from such persons or deserted by them and coming under the control of the government of the United States and all slaves of such person found on or being within any place occupied by rebel forces and afterwards occupied by the forces of the United States, shall be deemed captives of war, and shall be forever free of their servitude, and not again held as slaves.
Thus everyone who 60 days after July 17, 1862 supported the rebellion was to be punished by having all their slaves freed. The goal was to weaken the rebellion, which was led and controlled by slave owners. This did not abolish the legal institution of slavery (the XIII Amendment did that), but it shows Lincoln had the support of (and was even somewhat pushed by) Congress in liberating the slaves owned by rebels. Lincoln implemented the new law by his "Emancipation Proclamation."
Lincoln is well known for ending slavery in the United States and he personally opposed slavery as a profound moral evil not in accord with the principle of equality asserted in the Declaration of Independence. Yet, Lincoln's views of the role of the federal government on the subject of slavery are more complicated. Before the Confederate states seceded, Lincoln had campaigned against the expansion of slavery into the territories, where Congress did have authority. However, he maintained that the federal government could not constitutionally bar slavery in states where it already existed. During his presidency, Lincoln made it clear that the North was fighting the war to preserve the Union, not to abolish slavery. Freeing the slaves was a war measure to weaken the rebellion by destroying the economic base of its leadership class. Lincoln was criticized both at home and abroad for his refusal to take a stand for the complete abolition of slavery. On August 22, 1862, a few weeks before signing the Proclamation, and after it had already been drafted, Lincoln responded by letter to an editorial by Horace Greeley of the ''New York Tribune'' which had urged abolition:
:I would save the Union. I would save it the shortest way under the Constitution. The sooner the national authority can be restored the nearer the Union will be "the Union as it was." If there be those who would not save the Union, unless they could at the same time save slavery, I do not agree with them. If there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the same time destroy slavery, I do not agree with them. My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because I believe it helps to save the Union and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union. I shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am doing hurts the cause, and I shall do more whenever I shall believe doing more will help the cause. I shall try to correct errors when shown to be errors and I shall adopt new views so fast as they shall appear to be true views.
:I have here stated my purpose according to my view of official duty and I intend no modification of my oft expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.
With the Emancipation Proclamation issued in two parts on September 22, 1862 and January 1, 1863, Lincoln made the abolition of slavery a goal of the war. Lincoln addresses the issue of his consistency (or lack thereof) between his earlier position and his later position on emancipation in an 1864 letter to Albert G. Hodges
Lincoln is often credited with freeing enslaved African Americans with the Emancipation Proclamation. However, border states that still allowed slavery but were under Union control were exempt from the emancipation because they were not covered under any war measures. The proclamation on its first day, January 1, 1863, freed only a few escaped slaves, but as Union armies advanced south more and more slaves were liberated until hundreds of thousands were freed (exactly how many is unknown). Lincoln signed the Proclamation as a wartime measure, insisting that only the outbreak of war gave constitutional power to the President to free slaves in states where it already existed. He later said: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper." The proclamation made abolishing slavery in the rebel states an official war goal and it became the impetus for the enactment of the 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution which abolished slavery Lincoln was one of the main promoters of that amendment.
Although some Northern conservatives recoiled at the notion that the war was now being fought for the slaves instead of for preserving the Union, in the end the Emancipation Proclamation did much to help the Northern cause politically. Lincoln's strong abolitionist stand finally convinced the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and other foreign countries that they could not support the Confederate States of America. This move remains one of the great seizures of private property by the federal government, restoring the ownership of the blacks to themselves,
Lincoln had for some time been working on plans to set up colonies in Africa and South America for the nearly 4 million newly freed slaves. He remarked upon colonization favorably in the Emancipation Proclamation, but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed.
Important domestic measures of Lincoln's first term
.
Lincoln believed in the Whig theory of the presidency, which left Congress to write the laws. He was anti vescovian. He signed them, vetoing only bills that threatened his war powers. Thus he signed the Homestead Act in 1862, making available millions of acres of government held land in the west for purchase at very low cost. The Morrill Land Grant Colleges Act, also signed in 1862, provided government grants for agricultural universities in each state. Lincoln also signed the Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864, which granted federal support to the construction of the United States' first transcontinental railroad, which was completed in 1869. The most important legislation involved money matters, including the first income tax and higher tariffs. Most important was the creation of the system of national banks by the National Banking Acts of 1863, 1864 and 1865 which allowed the creation of a strong national financial system.
Lincoln sent a senior general to put down the "Sioux Uprising" of August 1862 in Minnesota. Presented with 303 death warrants for convicted Santee Dakota who had massacred innocent farmers, Lincoln affirmed 39 of these for execution (one was later reprieved).
1864 election and second inauguration
After Union victories at Gettysburg, Vicksburg and Chattanooga in 1863, many in the North believed that victory was soon to come after Lincoln appointed U.S. Grant General in Chief on March 12, 1864. Although no president since Andrew Jackson had been elected to a second term (and none since Van Buren had been re nominated), Lincoln's re election was considered a certainty.
However, when the spring campaigns, east and west, all turned into bloody stalemates, Northern morale dipped and Lincoln seemed less likely to be re nominated. Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase strongly desired the Republican nomination and was working hard to win it, while John Fremont was nominated by a breakoff group of radical Republicans, potentially taking away crucial votes in the November elections.
Fearing he might lose the election, Lincoln wrote out and signed the following pledge, but did not show it to his cabinet, asking them each to sign the sealed envelope. Lincoln wrote:
:This morning, as for some days past, it seems exceedingly probable that this Administration will not be re elected. Then it will be my duty to so co operate with the President elect, as to save the Union between the election and the inauguration as he will have secured his election on such ground that he can not possibly save it afterwards.
The Democrats, hoping to make setbacks in the war a top campaign issue, waited until late summer to nominate a candidate. Their platform was heavily influenced by the Peace wing of the party, calling the war a "failure," but their candidate, former General George McClellan, was a War Democrat, determined to prosecute the war until the Union was restored, although willing to compromise on all other issues, including slavery.
McClellan's candidacy was soon undercut as on September 1, just two days after the convention, Atlanta was abandoned by the Confederate army. Coming on the heels of David Farragut's capture of Mobile Bay and followed by Phil Sheridan's crushing victory over Jubal Early's army at Cedar Creek, it was now apparent that the tide had turned in favor of the Union and that Lincoln may be reelected despite the costs of the war.
Still, Lincoln believed that he would win the electoral vote by only a slim margin, failing to give him the mandate he'd need if he was to push his lenient reconstruction plan. To his surprise, Lincoln ended up winning all but two states, capturing 212 of 233 electoral votes.
After Lincoln's election, on March 4, 1865, he delivered his second inaugural address, which was his favorite of all his speeches. At this time, a victory over the rebels was within sight, slavery had effectively ended, and Lincoln was looking to the future.
:Fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond man's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said "the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether"
:With malice toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the nation's wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.
Civil War and reconstruction
Conducting the war effort
The war was a source of constant frustration for the president, and it occupied nearly all of his time. Lincoln had a contentious relationship with General George B. McClellan, who became general in chief of all the Union armies in the wake of the embarrassing Union defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run and after the retirement of Winfield Scott in late 1861. Lincoln wished to take an active part in planning the war strategy despite his inexperience in military affairs. Lincoln's strategic priorities were two fold: first, to ensure that Washington, D.C., was well defended and second, to conduct an aggressive war effort in hopes of ending the war quickly and appeasing the Northern public and press, who pushed for an offensive war. McClellan, a youthful West Point graduate and railroad executive called back to military service, took a more cautious approach. McClellan took several months to plan and execute his Peninsula Campaign, which involved capturing Richmond by moving the Army of the Potomac by boat to the peninsula between the James and York Rivers. McClellan's delay irritated Lincoln, as did McClellan's insistence that no troops were needed to defend Washington, D.C. Lincoln insisted on holding some of McClellan's troops to defend the capital, a decision McClellan blamed for the ultimate failure of his Peninsula Campaign.
McClellan, a lifelong Democrat who was temperamentally conservative, was relieved as general in chief after releasing his ''Harrison's Landing Letter'', where he offered unsolicited political advice to Lincoln urging caution in the war effort. McClellan's letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint fellow Republican John Pope as head of the new Army of Virginia. Pope complied with Lincoln's strategic desire for the Union to move towards Richmond from the north, thus guarding Washington, D.C. However, Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run during the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac back into the defenses of Washington for a second time. Pope was sent to Minnesota to fight the Sioux.
Panicked by Confederate General Robert E. Lee's invasion of Maryland, Lincoln restored McClellan to command of all forces around Washington in time for the Battle of Antietam in September 1862. It was the Union victory in that battle that allowed Lincoln to release his Emancipation Proclamation. Lincoln relieved McClellan of command shortly after the 1862 midterm elections and appointed Republican Ambrose Burnside to head the Army of the Potomac, who promised to follow through on Lincoln's strategic vision for an aggressive offensive against Lee and Richmond. After Burnside was stunningly defeated at Fredericksburg, Joseph Hooker was given command, despite his idle talk about becoming a military strong man. Hooker was routed by Lee at Chancellorsville in May 1863 and also relieved of command.
After the Union victory at Gettysburg, Meade's failure to pursue Lee, and months of inactivity for the Army of the Potomac, Lincoln decided to bring in a western general: General Ulysses S. Grant. He had a solid string of victories in the Western Theater, including Vicksburg and Chattanooga. Earlier, reacting to criticism of Grant, Lincoln was quoted as saying, "I cannot spare this man. He fights." Grant waged his bloody Overland Campaign in 1864, using a strategy of a war of attrition, characterized by high Union losses at battles such as the Wilderness and Cold Harbor, but by proportionately higher losses in the Confederate army. Grant's aggressive campaign would eventually bottle up Lee in the Siege of Petersburg and result in the Union taking Richmond and bringing the war to a close in the spring of 1865.
Lincoln authorized Grant to use a scorched earth approach to destroy the South's morale and economic ability to continue the war. This allowed Generals William Tecumseh Sherman and Philip Sheridan to destroy farms and towns in the Shenandoah Valley, Georgia, and South Carolina. The damage in Sherman's March to the Sea through Georgia totaled in excess of 100 million.
Lincoln had a star crossed record as a military leader, possessing a keen understanding of strategic points (such as the Mississippi River and the fortress city of Vicksburg) and the importance of defeating the enemy's army, rather than simply capturing cities. However, he had little success in his efforts to motivate his generals to adopt his strategies. Eventually, he found in Grant a man who shared his vision of the war and was able to bring that vision to reality with his relentless pursuit of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters of war.
Lincoln, perhaps reflecting his lack of military experience, developed a keen curiosity with military campaigning during the war. He spent hours at the War Department telegraph office, reading dispatches from his generals through many a night. He frequently visited battle sites and seemed fascinated by watching scenes of war. During Jubal A. Early's raid into Washington, D.C., in 1864, Lincoln had to be told to duck his head to avoid being shot while observing the scenes of battle.
Homefront
Lincoln was more successful in giving the war meaning to Northern civilians through his oratorical skills. Despite his meager education and backwoods upbringing, Lincoln possessed an extraordinary command of the English language, as evidenced by the Gettysburg Address, a speech dedicating a cemetery of Union soldiers from the Battle of Gettysburg that he delivered on November 19, 1863. While the featured speaker, orator Edward Everett, spoke for two hours, Lincoln's few choice words resonated across the nation and across history, defying Lincoln's own prediction that "the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here." Lincoln's second inaugural address is also greatly admired and often quoted. In these speeches, Lincoln articulated better than any of his contemporaries the rationale behind the Union effort.
During the Civil War, Lincoln exercised powers no previous president had wielded he proclaimed a blockade, suspended the writ of habeas corpus, spent money without congressional authorization, and imprisoned thousands of accused Confederate sympathizers without trial. There is a fragment of uncorraborated evidence that Lincoln made contingency plans to arrest Chief Justice Roger Brooke Taney, though the allegation remains unresolved and controversial (see the Taney Arrest Warrant controversy).
The long war and the issue of emancipation appeared to be severely hampering his prospects and pessimists warned that defeat appeared likely. Lincoln ran under the Union party banner, composed of War Democrats and Republicans. General Grant was facing severe criticism for his conduct of the bloody Overland Campaign that summer and the seemingly endless Siege of Petersburg. However, the Union capture of the key railroad center of Atlanta by Sherman's forces in September changed the situation dramatically and Lincoln was reelected.
Reconstruction
The reconstruction of the Union weighed heavy on the President's mind throughout the war effort. He was determined to take a course that would not permanently alienate the former Confederate states, and throughout the war Lincoln urged speedy elections under generous terms in areas behind Union lines. This irritated congressional Republicans, who urged a more stringent Reconstruction policy. One of Lincoln's few vetoes during his term was of the Wade Davis Bill, an effort by congressional Republicans to impose harsher Reconstruction terms on the Confederate areas. Republicans in Congress retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee during the war under Lincoln's generous terms.
"Let 'em up easy," he told his assembled military leaders Gen. Ulysses S. Grant (a future president), Gen. William T. Sherman and Adm. David Dixon Porter in an 1865 meeting on the steamer ''River Queen''. When Richmond, the Confederate capital, was at long last captured, Lincoln went there to make a public gesture of sitting at Jefferson Davis's own desk, symbolically saying to the nation that the President of the United States held authority over the entire land. He was greeted at the city as a conquering hero by freed slaves, whose sentiments were epitomized by one admirer's quote, "I know I am free for I have seen the face of Father Abraham and have felt him."
On April 9, 1865, Confederate General Robert E. Lee surrendered at Appomattox Court House in Virginia. This left only Joseph Johnston's forces in the East to deal with. Weeks later Johnston would defy Jefferson Davis and surrender his forces to Sherman. Of course, Lincoln would not survive to see the surrender of all Confederate forces just five days after Lee surrendered, Lincoln was assassinated. He was the first President to be assassinated, and the third to die in office.
Assassination
, Clara Harris, Mary Todd Lincoln, Lincoln, and Booth.
Lincoln had met frequently with Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant as the war drew to a close. The two men planned matters of reconstruction, and it was evident to all that they held each other in high regard. During their last meeting, on April 14, 1865 (Good Friday), Lincoln invited Grant to a social engagement that evening. Grant declined (Grant's wife, Julia Dent Grant, is said to have strongly disliked Mary Todd Lincoln). The President's eldest son, Robert Todd Lincoln, also turned down the invitation.
John Wilkes Booth, a well known actor and Southern sympathizer from Maryland, heard that the president and Mrs. Lincoln, along with the Grants, would be attending Ford's Theatre. Having failed in a plot to kidnap Lincoln earlier, Booth informed his co conspirators of his intention to kill Lincoln. Others were assigned to assassinate Vice President Andrew Johnson and Secretary of State William Seward.
Without his bodyguard Ward Hill Lamon, to whom he related his famous dream of his own assassination, the Lincolns left to attend the play at Ford's Theater. The play, ''Our American Cousin'', was a musical comedy by the British writer Tom Taylor. As Lincoln sat in his state box in the balcony, Booth crept up behind the President's box and waited for the funniest line of the play, hoping the laughter would cover the gunshot noise. On stage, actor Harry Hawk said the last words Lincoln would ever hear "Well, I guess I know enough to turn you inside out, old gal you sockdologizing old man trap...". When the laughter came Booth jumped into the box the president was in and aimed a single shot, round slug .44 caliber Deringer at his head, firing at point blank range. The bullet entered behind Lincoln's left ear and lodged behind his right eyeball. Major Henry Rathbone, who was present in the Presidential Box, momentarily grappled with Booth but was severely stabbed and slashed by the assassin. It was believed that Booth then shouted "''Sic semper tyrannis!''" (Latin: "Thus always to tyrants," the state motto of Virginia some accounts say he added "The South is avenged!") and jumped from the balcony to the stage below, breaking his leg. Despite his injury, Booth managed to limp to his horse and make his escape.
As Booth fled from the theater, a young physician, Dr. Charles Leale, made his way through the audience to Lincoln's box. Leale quickly assessed the wound as mortal. The President was taken across the street from the theater to the Petersen House, where he lay in a coma for nine hours before he expired. Several physicians attended Lincoln, including U.S. Army Surgeon General Joseph K. Barnes of the Army Medical Museum. Using a probe, Barnes located some fragments of Lincoln's skull and the ball lodged 6 inches inside his brain. Lincoln, who never regained consciousness, was officially pronounced dead at 7:22 A.M. the next morning, April 15, 1865. Upon his death, Secretary of War Edwin Stanton lamented "now he belongs to the ages." After Lincoln's body was returned to the White House, his body was prepared for his "lying in state" in the East Room.
The Army Medical Museum, now named the National Museum of Health and Medicine, has retained in its collection since the time of Lincoln's death, several artifacts relating to the assassination. Currently on display in the museum are the bullet that was fired from the Deringer pistol, ending Lincoln's life, the probe used by Barnes, pieces of his skull and hair and the surgeon's cuff, stained with Lincoln's blood. The museum can be found at
Lincoln's body was carried by train in a grand funeral procession through several states on its way back to Illinois. The nation mourned a man whom many viewed as the savior of the United States. He was buried in Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield, where a 177 foot (54 m) tall granite tomb surmounted with several bronze statues of Lincoln was constructed by 1874. To prevent repeated attempts to steal Lincoln's body and hold it for ransom, Robert Todd Lincoln had Lincoln exhumed and reinterred in concrete several feet thick on September 26, 1901.
Presidential appointments
Administration and Cabinet
Lincoln was known for appointing his enemies and political rivals to high positions in his Cabinet. Not only did he use great political skill in reducing potential political opposition, but he felt he was appointing the best qualified person for the good of the country.
class "wikitable"
! Office !! Name !! Term
President '''Abraham Lincoln''' 1861 1865
Vice President '''Hannibal Hamlin''' 1861 1865
'''Andrew Johnson''' 1865
Secretary of State '''William H. Seward''' 1861 1865
Secretary of the Treasury '''Salmon P. Chase''' 1861 1864
'''William P. Fessenden''' 1864 1865
'''Hugh McCulloch''' 1865
Secretary of War '''Simon Cameron''' 1861 1862
'''Edwin M. Stanton''' 1862 1865
Attorney General '''Edward Bates''' 1861 1864
'''James Speed''' align "left" 1864 1865
Postmaster General '''Horatio King''' 1861
'''Montgomery Blair''' 1861 1864
'''William Dennison''' 1864 1865
Secretary of the Navy '''Gideon Welles''' 1861 1865
Secretary of the Interior '''Caleb B. Smith''' 1861 1863
'''John P. Usher''' 1863 1865
br clear "all"
Supreme Court
Lincoln appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:
Noah Haynes Swayne 1862
Samuel Freeman Miller 1862
David Davis 1862
Stephen Johnson Field 1863
Salmon P. Chase Chief Justice 1864
Major presidential acts
Involvement as President elect
Morrill Tariff of 1861
Corwin Amendment
Enacted as President
Signed Revenue Act of 1861
Signed Homestead Act
Signed Morill Land Grant College Act
Signed Internal Revenue Act of 1862
Signed Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864
Established Department of Agriculture (1862)
Signed National Banking Act of 1863
Signed Internal Revenue Act of 1864
States admitted to the Union
West Virginia 1863
Nevada 1864
Legacy and memorials
Lincoln's death made the President a martyr to many. Today he is perhaps America's second most famous and beloved President after George Washington. Repeated polls of historians have ranked Lincoln as among the greatest presidents in U.S. history. Among contemporary admirers, Lincoln is usually seen as a figure who personifies 's seated ''Lincoln'' faces the National Mall to the east.
classical values of honesty, integrity, as well as respect for individual and minority rights, and human freedom in general. Many American organizations of all purposes and agendas continue to cite his name and image, with interests ranging from the gay rights group Log Cabin Republicans to the insurance corporation Lincoln Financial. The Lincoln automobile is also named after him.
Over the years Lincoln has been memorialized in many city names, notably the capital of Nebraska with the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. (''pictured, right'') on the U.S. 5 bill and the 1 cent coin (Illinois is the primary opponent to the removal of the penny from circulation) and as part of the Mount Rushmore National Memorial. Lincoln's Tomb, Lincoln Home National Historic Site in Springfield, New Salem, Illinois (a reconstruction of Lincoln's early adult hometown), Ford's Theater and Petersen House are all preserved as museums. The state nickname for Illinois is ''Land of Lincoln''.
Counties in 18 U.S. states (Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Tennessee, West Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming) are named after Lincoln.
On February 12, 1892, Abraham Lincoln's birthday was declared to be a federal holiday in the United States, although in 1971 it was combined with Washington's birthday in the form of President's Day. February 12 is still observed as a separate legal holiday in many states, including Illinois.
Lincoln's birthplace and family home are national historic memorials: Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site in Hodgenville, Kentucky and Lincoln Home National Historic Site in Springfield, Illinois. The Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum is also in Springfield. The Abraham Lincoln National Cemetery is located in Elwood, Illinois.
Statues of Lincoln can be found in other countries. In Ciudad Ju rez, Chihuahua, Mexico, is a 13 foot high bronze statue, a gift from the United States, dedicated in 1966 by President Lyndon B. Johnson. The U.S. received a statue of Benito Ju rez in exchange, which is in Washington, D.C. Ju rez and Lincoln exchanged friendly letters, and Mexico remembers Lincoln's opposition to the Mexican American War. There is also a statue in Tijuana, Mexico, showing Lincoln standing and destroying the chains of slavery. There are at least three statues of Lincoln in the United Kingdom one in London by Augustus St. Gaudens, one in Manchester by George Grey Barnard and another in Edinburgh by George Bissell.
The ballistic missile submarine ''Abraham Lincoln'' (SSBN 602) and the aircraft carrier ''Abraham Lincoln'' (CVN 72) were named in his honor. Also, the Liberty ship, SS ''Nancy Hanks'' was named to honor his mother.
In a recent public vote entitled "The Greatest American," Lincoln placed second (placing first was Ronald Reagan).
Lincoln in popular culture
Trivia
Lincoln stood 6'3 3 4" (192.4 cm) tall and thus was the tallest president in U.S. history, just edging out Lyndon Johnson at 6'3 1 2" (191.8 cm).
He was born on the same day as Charles Darwin.
The last surviving self described witness to Lincoln's assassination was Samuel J. Seymour ( 1860 April 14, 1956), who appeared two months before his death at age 96 on the CBS TV quiz show ''I've Got a Secret''. He said that as a five year old he had thought at first that he, himself, had been shot because his nurse, trying to fix a torn place in his blouse, stuck him with a pin at the moment of the gun's discharge.
According to legend, Lincoln was referred to as "two faced" by his opponent in the 1858 Senate election, Stephen Douglas. Upon hearing about this Lincoln jokingly replied, "If I had another face to wear, do you really think I would be wearing this one?"
According to legend, Lincoln also said, as a young man, on his appearance one day when looking in the mirror: "It's a fact, Abe! You are the ugliest man in the world. If ever I see a man uglier than you, I'm going to shoot him on the spot!" It would no doubt, he thought, be an act of mercy.
Based on written descriptions of Lincoln, including the observations that he was much taller than most men of his day and had long limbs, an abnormally shaped chest, and loose or lax joints, it has been conjectured since the 1960s that Lincoln may have suffered from Marfan syndrome.
Lincoln was known to have a case of depression. During his time in New Salem, Illinois, his fiancee died, and that triggered his depression. His close friends watched over him to make sure he did not commit suicide. He also suffered from nightmares during his term in the White House. His depression got so severe, he had to hold a cabinet meeting from his bed.
He once mentioned one of his haunting nightmares to his friend. Lincoln mentioned that he was standing in a mourning crowd surrounding a train, and when he asked a grieving woman what had happened, she replied, "The President has been shot, and he has died."
Lincoln is the only American president to hold a patent. The patent is for a device that lifts boats over shoals.
See also
Origins of the American Civil War
American System, Lincoln's economic beliefs.
Lincoln Kennedy coincidences
List of U.S. Presidential religious affiliations
Movies: ''D.W. Griffith's 'Abraham Lincoln''', ''The Dramatic Life of Abraham Lincoln''
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum
References
Biographies
''Lincoln'' by David Herbert Donald (1999) ISBN 068482535X, very well reviewed by scholars Donald has won two Pulitzer prizes for biography
''Abraham Lincoln and Civil War America: A Biography'' by William E. Gienapp ISBN 0195150996 (2002), short
''Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln'' by Doris Kearns Goodwin ISBN 0684824906 (2005). reviewers report it is very well written
''Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President'' by Allen C. Guelzo ISBN 0802838723 (1999)
''Abraham Lincoln: a History'' (1890) by John Hay online at and 10 volumes in all written by Lincoln's top aides
''The Real Abraham Lincoln'' by Reinhard H Luthin (1960), well regarded by reviewers
''The Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia'' by Mark E. Neely (1984), detailed articles on many men and movements associated with AL
''The Last Best Hope of Earth: Abraham Lincoln and the Promise of America'' by Mark E. Neely (1993), Pulitzer prize winning author
''With Malice Toward None: The Life of Abraham Lincoln'' by Stephen B. Oates (1994).
''Lincoln the President'' by James G. Randall (4 vol., 1945 55 reprint 2000.) by prize winning scholar
''Mr. Lincoln'' excerpts ed. by Richard N. Current (1957)
''Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years'' (2 vol 1926) ''The War Years'' (4 vol 1939) biography by Carl Sandburg. Pulitzer Prize winner by famous poet
''Abraham Lincoln: A Biography'' by Benjamin P. Thomas (1952)
Specialty topics
Baker, Jean H. ''Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography'' (1987)
Belz, Herman. ''Abraham Lincoln, Constitutionalism, and Equal Rights in the Civil War Era'' (1998)
Boritt, Gabor S. ''Lincoln and the Economics of the American Dream'' (1994). Lincoln's economic theory and policies
Boritt, Gabor S. ''Lincoln the War President'' (1994).
Boritt, Gabor S., ed. ''The Historian's Lincoln.'' Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988, historiography
Bruce, Robert V. ''Lincoln and the Tools of War'' (1956) on weapons development during the war
Donald, David Herbert. ''Lincoln Reconsidered: Essays on the Civil War Era'' (1960).
Foner, Eric. ''Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the Civil War'' (1970) intellectual history of different prewar faction's in AL's party
Harris, William C. ''With Charity for All: Lincoln and the Restoration of the Union'' (1997). AL's plans for Reconstruction
Hendrick, Burton J. ''Lincoln's War Cabinet'' (1946)
Hofstadter, Richard. ''The American Political Tradition: And the Men Who Made It'' (1948) ch 5: "Abraham Lincoln and the Self MAde Myth".
Holzer, Harold. ''Lincoln at Cooper Union: The Speech That Made Abraham Lincoln President'' (2004).
McPherson, James M. ''Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution'' (1992)
McPherson, James M. ''Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era'' (1988). Pulitzer Prize winner surveys all aspects of the war
Morgenthau, Hans J., and David Hein. ''Essays on Lincoln's Faith and Politics''. Lanham, MD: University Press of America for the White Burkett Miller Center of Public Affairs at the University of Virginia, 1983.
Neely, Mark E. ''The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties'' (1992). Pulitzer Prize winner.
Philip S. Paludan ''The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln'' (1994), reviewers call it the most thorough treatment of AL's administration
''Lincoln in American Memory'' by Merrill D. Peterson, (1994). how Lincoln was remembered after 1865
Randall, James G. ''Lincoln the Liberal Statesman'' (1947).
Richardson, Heather Cox. ''The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican Economic Policies during the Civil War'' (1997)
Shenk, Joshua Wolf. ''Lincoln's Melancholy: How Depression Challenged a President and Fueled His Greatness'' (2005). Named one of the best books of 2005 by The Washington Post, The New York Times, and The Atlanta Journal Constitution. ''Lincoln'' by Gore Vidal ISBN 0375708766, a novel.
''Lincoln and His Generals'' by T. Harry Williams (1967).
''Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America'' by Garry Wills ISBN 0671867423
''Honor's Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln'' by Douglas L. Wilson (1999).
Lincoln in art and popular culture
Bullard. F. Lauriston, ''Lincoln in Marble and Bronze'', Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey 1952
Mead, Fanklin B., ''Heroic Statues in Bronze of Abraham Lincoln: Introducing The Hoosier Youth by Paul Manship'', The Lincoln National Life Foundation, Fort Wayne, Indiana 1932
Moffatt, Frederick C., ''Errant Bronzes: George Grey Barnard's Statues of Abraham Lincoln'', University of Deleware Press, Newark, DE 1998
Murry, Freeman Henry Morris, ''Emancipation anf the Freed in American Sculpture'', Books For Libraries Press, the Black Heritage Library Collection, Freeport, NY 1972 originally published in 1916
Petz, Weldon, ''Michigan's Monumental Tributes to Abraham Lincoln'', Historical Society of Michigan 1987
Redway, Maurine Whorton and Dorothy Kendall Bracken, ''Marks of Lincoln on Our Land''. Hastings House, Publishers, New York 1957
Savage, Kirk, ''Standing Soldiers, Kneeling Slaves: Race War and Monument in Nineteenth Century America'', Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey 1997
Tice, George, ''Lincoln'', Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey 1984
''The Real Lincoln'' by Thomas DiLorenzo ISBN 0761526463, a stinging neo Confederate attack on Lincoln as evil 2002
Primary Sources
Basler, Roy P. ed. ''Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln'' 9 vols. (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Univ. Press, 1953 55)
Basler, Roy P. ed. ''Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings'' (1946)
Lincoln, Abraham. ''Lincoln: Speeches and Writings'' 2 vol Library of America edition, (1989).
Lincoln, Abraham. ''The Life and Writings of Abraham Lincoln'' (Modern Library Classics ed by Philip Van Doren Stern) (2000).
External links
(1850 1865)
My Big Adventure (33 Images)
Washington, DC
Fort Wayne, Indiana
A national book award sponsored by The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College
Patent ''Manner of Buoying Vessels'' A. Lincoln 1849
(an archive of articles on Lincoln)
(includes good early history)
Hoard Historical Museum in Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin with Lincoln Library
(World of Biography)
Project Gutenberg eTexts
List of
and of ''Abraham Lincoln: a History'' (1890) by John Hay (1835 to 1905) John George Nicolay (1832 to 1901)
(1907) by Nicolay, Helen (1866 to 1954)
(1901) by Henry Ketcham
and of ''Abraham Lincoln'' (1899) by John T. Morse
(1913) by Francis Fisher Browne
(1909) by George Haven Putnam, Litt. D.
(1922) by Nathaniel W. Stephenson
succession box
title
before John Henry
after Thomas Langrell Harris
years 1847 1849
succession box
before John Fr mont
title Republican Party presidential nominee
after Ulysses Grant
years 1860 (won), 1864 (won)
succession box
before James Buchanan
title President of the United States
after Andrew Johnson
years March 4, 1861 April 15, 1865
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
Lincoln, Abraham
ar:
bg:
bs:Abraham Lincoln
ca:Abraham Lincoln
cs:Abraham Lincoln
cy:Abraham Lincoln
da:Abraham Lincoln
de:Abraham Lincoln
eo:Abraham LINCOLN
es:Abraham Lincoln
et:Abraham Lincoln
eu:Abraham Lincoln
fa:
fi:Abraham Lincoln
fr:Abraham Lincoln
ga:Abraham Lincoln
gl:Abraham Lincoln
he:
hr:Abraham Lincoln
id:Abraham Lincoln
it:Abramo Lincoln
ja:
ko:
lt:Abraomas Linkolnas
mk:
nl:Abraham Lincoln
nn:Abraham Lincoln
no:Abraham Lincoln
pl:Abraham Lincoln
pt:Abraham Lincoln
ru: ,
scn:Abraham Lincoln
sh:Abraham Lincoln
simple:Abraham Lincoln
sk:Abraham Lincoln
sl:Abraham Lincoln
sq:Abraham Lincoln
sr:
sv:Abraham Lincoln
th:
tr:Abraham Lincoln
vi:Abraham Lincoln
zh:
Infobox Philosopher
! Scroll down to edit this page
! Philosopher Category
region Western philosophers
era Ancient philosophy
color B0C4DE
! Image and Caption
image name Aristoteles Louvre.jpg
image caption Aristotle, marble copy of bronze by Lysippos
! Information
name , Aristotel s
birth 384 BC
death March 7 322 BC
school tradition Materialism and Empiricism
main interests Politics,
influences Plato,
influenced Alexander the Great, Thomas Aquinas
notable ideas The Golden mean, Rule of the Superior, Reason Passion,
'''Aristotle''' ( Aristotel s 384 BC March 7, 322 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher, who studied with Plato and taught Alexander the Great. He wrote books on many subjects, including physics, poetry, zoology, logic, rhetoric, government, and biology.
Aristotle, along with Plato and Socrates, is generally considered one of the most influential of ancient Greek philosophers. They transformed Presocratic Greek philosophy into the foundations of Western philosophy as we know it. The writings of Plato and Aristotle founded two of the most important schools of Ancient philosophy.
Aristotle valued knowledge gained from the senses and in modern terms would be classed among the modern empiricists (see materialism and empiricism). He also achieved a "grounding" of dialectic in the Topics by allowing interlocutors to begin from commonly held beliefs (''Endoxa'') his goal being non contradiction rather than Truth. He set the stage for what would eventually develop into the empiricist version of scientific method centuries later. Although he wrote dialogues early in his career, no more than fragments of these have survived. The works of Aristotle that still exist today are in treatise form and were, for the most part, unpublished texts. These were probably lecture notes or texts used by his students, and were almost certainly revised repeatedly over the course of years. As a result, these works tend to be eclectic, dense and difficult to read. Among the most important ones are ''Physics'', ''Metaphysics (or Ontology)'', ''Nicomachean Ethics'', ''Politics'', ''De Anima (On the Soul)'' and ''Poetics''.
These works, although connected in many fundamental ways, are very different in both style and substance.
Aristotle is known for being one of the few figures in history who studied almost every subject possible at the time. In science, Aristotle studied anatomy, astronomy, economics, embryology, geography, geology, meteorology, physics, and zoology. In philosophy, Aristotle wrote on aesthetics, ethics, government, metaphysics, politics, psychology, rhetoric and theology. He also dealt with education, foreign customs, literature and poetry. His combined works practically constitute an encyclopedia of Greek knowledge.
Biography
Early life and studies at the Academy
of Aristotle is a nearly ubiquitous ornament in places of high culture in the West.
Aristotle was born at Stageira, a colony of Andros on the Macedonian peninsula of Chalcidice in 384 BC. His father, Nicomachus, was court physician to King Amyntas III of Macedon. It is believed that Aristotle's ancestors held this position under various kings of the Macedons. As such, Aristotle's early education would probably have consisted of instruction in medicine and biology from his father. About his mother, Phaestis, little is known. It is known that she died early in Aristotle's life. When Nicomachus also died, in Aristotle's tenth year, he was left an orphan and placed under the guardianship of his uncle, Proxenus of Atarneus. He taught Aristotle Greek, rhetoric, and poetry (O'Connor ''et al.'', 2004). Aristotle was probably influenced by his father's medical knowledge when he went to Athens at the age of 18, he was likely already trained in the investigation of natural phenomena.
From the age of 18 to 37 Aristotle remained in Athens as a pupil of Plato and distinguished himself at the ''Academy''. The relations between Plato and Aristotle have formed the subject of various legends, many of which depict Aristotle unfavourably. No doubt there were divergences of opinion between Plato, who took his stand on sublime, idealistic principles, and Aristotle, who even at that time showed a preference for the investigation of the facts and laws of the physical world. It is also probable that Plato suggested that Aristotle needed restraining rather than encouragement, but not that there was an open breach of friendship. In fact, Aristotle's conduct after the death of Plato, his continued association with Xenocrates and other Platonists, and his allusions in his writings to Plato's doctrines prove that while there were conflicts of opinion between Plato and Aristotle, there was no lack of cordial appreciation or mutual forbearance. Besides this, the legends that reflect Aristotle unfavourably are traceable to the Epicureans, who were known as slanderers. If such legends were circulated widely by patristic writers such as Justin Martyr and Gregory Nazianzen, the reason lies in the exaggerated esteem Aristotle was held in by the early Christian heretics, not in any well grounded historical tradition.
Aristotle as philosopher and tutor
After the death of Plato (347 BC), Aristotle was considered as the next head of the Academy, a position that was eventually awarded to Plato's nephew. Aristotle then went with Xenocrates to the court of Hermias, ruler of Atarneus in Asia Minor, and married his niece and adopted daughter, Pythia. In 344 BC, Hermias was murdered in a rebellion, ! ''(or a Persian attack?)'' and Aristotle went with his family to Mytilene. It is also reported that he stopped on Lesbos and briefly conducted biological research. Then, one or two years later, he was summoned to Pella, the Macedonian capital, by King Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor of Alexander the Great, who was then 13.
Plutarch wrote that Aristotle not only imparted to Alexander a knowledge of ethics and politics, but also of the most profound secrets of philosophy. We have much proof that Alexander profited by contact with the philosopher, and that Aristotle made prudent and beneficial use of his influence over the young prince (although Bertrand Russell disputes this). Due to this influence, Alexander provided Aristotle with ample means for the acquisition of books and the pursuit of his scientific investigation.
It is possible that Aristotle also participated in the education of Alexander's boyhood friends, which may have included for example Hephaestion and Harpalus. Aristotle maintained a long correspondence with Hephaestion, eventually collected into a book, unfortunately now lost.
According to sources such as Plutarch and Diogenes, Philip had Aristotle's hometown of Stageira burned during the 340s BC, and Aristotle successfully requested that Alexander rebuild it. During his tutorship of Alexander, Aristotle was reportedly considered a second time for leadership of the Academy his companion Xenocrates was selected instead.
Founder and master of the Lyceum
In about 335 BC, Alexander departed for his Asiatic campaign, and Aristotle, who had served as an informal adviser (more or less) since Alexander ascended the Macedonian throne, returned to Athens and opened his own school of philosophy. He may, as Aulus Gellius says, have conducted a school of rhetoric during his former residence in Athens but now, following Plato's example, he gave regular instruction in philosophy in a gymnasium dedicated to Apollo Lyceios, from which his school has come to be known as the Lyceum. (It was also called the Peripatetic School because Aristotle preferred to discuss problems of philosophy with his pupils while walking up and down ''peripateo'' the shaded walks ''peripatoi'' around the gymnasium).
During the thirteen years (335 BC322 BC) which he spent as teacher of the Lyceum, Aristotle composed most of his writings. Imitating Plato, he wrote ''Dialogues'' in which his doctrines were expounded in somewhat popular language. He also composed the several treatises (which will be mentioned below) on physics, metaphysics, and so forth, in which the exposition is more didactic and the language more technical than in the ''Dialogues''. These writings show to what good use he put the resources Alexander had provided for him. They show particularly how he succeeded in bringing together the works of his predecessors in Greek philosophy, and how he pursued, either personally or through others, his investigations in the realm of natural phenomena. Pliny claimed that Alexander placed under Aristotle's orders all the hunters, fishermen, and fowlers of the royal kingdom and all the overseers of the royal forests, lakes, ponds and cattle ranges, and Aristotle's works on zoology make this statement more believable. Aristotle was fully informed about the doctrines of his predecessors, and Strabo asserted that he was the first to accumulate a great library.
During the last years of Aristotle's life the relations between him and Alexander became very strained, owing to the disgrace and punishment of Callisthenes, whom Aristotle had recommended to Alexander. Nevertheless, Aristotle continued to be regarded at Athens as a friend of Alexander and a representative of Macedonia. Consequently, when Alexander's death became known in Athens, and the outbreak occurred which led to the Lamian war, Aristotle shared in the general unpopularity of the Macedonians. The charge of impiety, which had been brought against Anaxagoras and Socrates, was now, with even less reason, brought against Aristotle. He left the city, saying (according to many ancient authorities) that he would not give the Athenians a chance to sin a third time against philosophy. He took up residence at his country house at Chalcis, in Euboea, and there he died the following year, 322 BC. His death was due to a disease, reportedly 'of the stomach', from which he had long suffered. The story that his death was due to hemlock poisoning, as well as the legend that he threw himself into the sea "because he could not explain the tides," is without historical foundation.
Very little is known about Aristotle's personal appearance except from hostile sources. The statues and busts of Aristotle, possibly from the first years of the Peripatetic School, represent him as sharp and keen of countenance, and somewhat below the average height. His characteras revealed by his writings, his will (which is undoubtedly genuine), fragments of his letters and the allusions of his unprejudiced contemporarieswas that of a high minded, kind hearted man, devoted to his family and his friends, kind to his slaves, fair to his enemies and rivals, grateful towards his benefactors. When Platonism ceased to dominate the world of Christian speculation, and the works of Aristotle began to be studied without fear and prejudice, the personality of Aristotle appeared to the Christian writers of the 13th century, as it had to the unprejudiced pagan writers of his own day, as calm, majestic, untroubled by passion, and undimmed by any great moral defects, "the master of those who know".
Aristotle's legacy also had a profound influence on Islamic thought and philosophy during the middle ages. The likes of Avicenna, Farabi, and Yaqub ibn Ishaq al Kindismall small were a few of the major proponents of the Aristotelian school of thought during the ''Golden Age of Islam''.
Methodology
Aristotle defines philosophy in terms of essence, saying that philosophy is "the science of the universal essence of that which is actual". Plato had defined it as the "science of the idea", meaning by idea what we should call the unconditional basis of phenomena. Both pupil and master regard philosophy as concerned with the universal Aristotle, however, finds the universal in particular things, and called it the essence of things, while Plato finds that the universal exists apart from particular things, and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar. For Aristotle, therefore, philosophic method implies the ascent from the study of particular phenomena to the knowledge of essences, while for Plato philosophic method means the descent from a knowledge of universal ideas to a contemplation of particular imitations of those ideas. In a certain sense, Aristotle's method is both inductive and deductive, while Plato's is essentially deductive.
In Aristotle's terminology, the term ''natural philosophy'' corresponds to the phenomena of the natural world, which include: motion, light, and the laws of physics. Many centuries later these subjects would become the basis of modern science, as studied through the scientific method. In modern times the term ''philosophy'' has come to be more narrowly understood as metaphysics, distinct from empirical study of the natural world via the physical sciences. In contrast, in Aristotle's time and use philosophy was taken to encompass all facets of intellectual inquiry.
In the larger sense of the word, he makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning, which he also called "science". Note, however, that his use of the term ''science'' carries a different meaning than that which is covered by the scientific method. "All science (''dianoia'') is either practical, poetical or theoretical." By practical science he understands ethics and politics by poetical, he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts while by theoretical philosophy he means physics, mathematics, and metaphysics.
The last, philosophy in the stricter sense, he defines as "the knowledge of immaterial being," and calls it "first philosophy", "the theologic science" or of "being in the highest degree of abstraction." If logic, or, as Aristotle calls it, Analytic, be regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy, we have as divisions of Aristotelian philosophy (1) Logic (2) Theoretical Philosophy, including Metaphysics, Physics, Mathematics, (3) Practical Philosophy and (4) Poetical Philosophy.
Aristotle's epistemology
Logic
History
Aristotle "says that 'on the subject of reasoning' he 'had nothing else on an earlier date to speak about'" (Bocheski, 1951). However, Plato reports that syntax was thought of before him, by Prodikos of Keos, who was concerned by the right use of words. Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics the earlier philosophers used concepts like ''reductio ad absurdum'' as a rule when discussing, but never understood its logical implications. Even Plato had difficulties with logic. Although he had the idea of constructing a system for deduction, he was never able to construct one. Instead, he relied on his dialectic, which was a confusion between different sciences and methods (Bocheski, 1951). Plato thought that deduction would simply follow from premises, so he focused on having good premises so that the conclusion would follow. Later on, Plato realised that a method for obtaining the conclusion would be beneficial. Plato never obtained such a method, but his best attempt was published in his book ''Sophist'', where he introduced his division method (Rose, 1968).
Analytics and the ''Organon''
What we call today Aristotelian logic, Aristotle himself would have labelled analytics. The term logic he reserved to mean dialectics. Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, since it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books at about the time of Christ:
''Categories''
''On Interpretation''
''Prior Analytics''
''Posterior Analytics''
''Topics''
''On Sophistical Refutations''
The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the ''Organon'', namely the fourth book of ''Metaphysics.'' (Bocheski, 1951).
Modal logic
Aristotle is also the creator of syllogisms with modalities (modal logic). The word modal refers to the word 'modes', explaining the fact that modal logic deals with the modes of truth. Aristotle introduced the qualification of 'necessary' and 'possible' premises. He constructed a logic which helped in the evaluation of truth but which was very difficult to interpret. (Rose, 1968).
Science
Aristotelian discussions about science had only been qualitative, not quantitative. By the modern definition of the term, Aristotelian philosophy was not science, as this worldview did not attempt to probe how the world actually worked through experiment. For example, in his book ''The history of animals'' he claimed that human males have more teeth than females. Had he only made some observations, he would have discovered that this claim is false.
Rather, based on what one's senses told one, Aristotelian philosophy then depended upon the assumption that man's mind could elucidate all the laws of the universe, based on simple observation (without experimentation) through reason alone.
One of the reasons for this was that Aristotle held that physics was about changing objects with a reality of their own, whereas mathematics was about unchanging objects without a reality of their own. In this philosophy, he could not imagine that there was a relationship between them.
In contrast, today's "science" assumes that thinking alone often leads people astray, and therefore one must compare one's ideas to the actual world through experimentation only then can one see if one's ideas are based in reality. This position is known as empiricism or the scientific method.
Although Aristotle initiated an important step in the history of scientific method by founding logic as a formal science, he also left behind a trail of bankrupt cosmology that we may discern in selections of the metaphysics. His cosmology would gain much acceptance up until the 1500 s, where Copernicus and Galileo began to figure out that Europe is not the center of the universe. From the 3rd century to the 1500 s, the dominant view held that the earth was the center of the universe: at this late date it is uncontroversial that the earth is not even the center of our own solar system.
In spite of Aristotle s bogus account of the planets and sun, he is a vital character in the history of metaphysics, both in terms of the etymology of the word, as well as a figure within metaphysics as a discipline. Dubbed the stuff next to the physics. by Andronicus of Rhodes, metaphysics became connected to the idea of beyond the physical by Simplicius, a commentator on Aristotle. Andronicus had published Aristotle s works sometime around 43 20 BC so initially the etymology of metaphysics was simply that which is next to the physics.
Aristotle's metaphysics
Causality
Aristole is the first who saw that "All causes of things are beginnings that we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause that to know a thing's existence is to know the reason for its existence." Setting the guidelines for all the subsequent causal theories, by specifying the number, nature, principles, elements, varieties, order, and modes of causation, Aristotle's account of the causes of things is the most comprehensive theory up to now. According to Aristotle's theory, all the causes fall into several senses, the total number of which amounts to the ways the question 'why' may be answered namely, by reference to the matter or the ''substratum'' the ''essence'', the pattern, the form, or the structure to the primary moving ''change'' or the agent and its action and to the goal, the plan, the ''end'', or the good. Consequently, the major kinds of causes come under the following divisions:
The Material Cause is that from which a thing comes into existence as from its parts, constituents, substratum or materials. This reduces the explanation of causes to the parts (factors, elements, constituents, ingredients) forming the whole (system, structure, compound, complex, composite, or combination) (the part whole causation).
The Formal Cause tells us what a thing is, that any thing is determined by the definition, form, pattern, essence, whole, synthesis, or archetype. It embraces the account of causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws, as the whole (macrostructure) is the cause of its parts (the whole part causation).
The Efficient Cause is that from which the change or the ending of the change first starts. It identifies 'what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed' and so suggests all sorts of agents, nonliving or living, acting as the sources of change or movement or rest. Representing the current understanding of causality as the relation of cause and effect, this covers the modern definitions of "cause" as either the agent or agency or particular events or states of affairs.
The Final Cause is that for the sake of which a thing exists or is done, including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities. The final cause or telos is the purpose or end that something is supposed to serve, or it is that from which and that to which the change is. This also covers modern ideas of mental causation involving such psychological causes as volition, need, motivation, or motives, rational, irrational, ethical, all that gives purpose to behavior.
Additionally, things can be causes of one another, causing each other reciprocally, as hard work causes fitness and vice versa, although not in the same way or function, the one is as the beginning of change, the other as the goal. Thus Aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causality as a relation of mutual dependence or action or influence of cause and effect. Also, Aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects, its presence and absent may result in different outcomes.
Besides, Aristotle marked two modes of causation: proper (prior) causation and accidental (chance) causation. All causes, proper and incidental, can be spoken as potential or as actual, particular or generic. The same language refers to the effects of causes, so that generic effects assigned to generic causes, particular effects to particular causes, operating causes to actual effects. Essentiallly, causality does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect
All further investigations of causality will be consisting in imposing the favorite hierarchies on the order causes, like as final efficient material formal (Aquinas), or in restricting all causality to the material and efficient causes or to the efficient causality (deterministic or chance) or just to regular sequences and correlations of natural phenomena (the natural sciences describing how things happen instead of explaining the whys and wherefores).
Chance and Spontaneity
Spontaneity and chance are causes of effects. Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things. It is "from what is spontaneous" (but note that what is spontaneous does not come from chance). For a better understanding of Aristotle's conception of "chance" it might be better to think of "coincidence": Something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having one thing take place, but with the result of another thing (not intended) taking place. For example: A person seeks donations. That person may find another person willing to donate a substantial sum. However, if the person seeking the donations met the person donating, not for the purpose of collecting donations, but for some other purpose, Aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that particular donator a result of chance. It must be unusual that something happens by chance. In other words, if something happens all or most of the time, we cannot say that it is by chance.
However, chance can only apply to human beings, it is in the sphere of moral actions. According to Aristotle, chance must involve choice (and thus deliberation), and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice. "What is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance" (Physics, 2.6).
The Five Elements
'''Fire''' which is hot and dry.
'''Earth''' which is cold and dry.
'''Air''' which is hot and wet.
'''Water''' which is cold and wet.
'''Aether''' which is the divine substance that makes up the heavens
These four elements interchange (i.e. Fire Air Water Earth etc.), while aether is on its own. The Sun keeps this cycle going. God keeps the Sun going (and thus the Sun is eternal).
Aristotle's ethics
Although Aristotle wrote several works on ethics, the major one was the ''Nicomachean Ethics'', which is considered one of Aristotle's greatest works it discusses virtues. The ten books which comprise it are based on notes from his lectures at the Lyceum and were either edited by or dedicated to Aristotle's son, Nicomachus.
Aristotle believed that ethical knowledge is not ''certain'' knowledge, like metaphysics and epistemology, but ''general knowledge''. Also, as it is a practical discipline rather than a theoretical one, he thought that in order to become "good," one could not simply study what virtue ''is'' one must actually do virtuous deeds.
In order to do this, Aristotle had first to establish what was virtuous. He began by determining that everything was done with some goal in mind and that goal is 'good.' The ultimate goal he called the ''Highest Good''.
Aristotle contested that happiness could not be found only in pleasure or only in fame and honor. He finally finds happiness "by ascertaining the specific function of man." But what is this function that will bring happiness? To determine this, Aristotle analyzed the soul and found it to have three parts: the Nutritive Soul (plants, animals and humans), the Perceptive Soul (animals and humans) and the Rational Soul (humans only). Thus, a human's function is to do what makes it human, to be good at what sets it apart from everything else: the ability to reason or ''Nous''. A person that does this is the happiest because they are fulfilling their purpose or nature as found in the rational soul. Depending on how well they did this, Aristotle said people belonged to one of four categories: the Virtuous, the Continent, the Incontinent and the Vicious.
Aristotle believes that every ethical virtue is an intermediate condition between excess and deficiency. This does not mean Aristotle believed in moral relativism, however. He set certain emotions (e.g., hate, envy, jealousy, spite, etc.) and certain actions (e.g., adultery, theft, murder, etc.) as always wrong, regardless of the situation or the circumstances.
Nicomachean ethics
In ''Nicomachean Ethics'', Aristotle focuses on the importance of continually behaving virtuously and developing virtue rather than committing specific good actions. This can be contrasted with Kantian ethics, in which the primary focus is on individual action. ''Nicomachean Ethics'' emphasizes the importance of context to ethical behaviour what might be right in one situation might be wrong in another. Aristotle believed that happiness is the end of life and that as long as a person is striving for goodness, good deeds will result from that struggle, making the person virtuous and therefore happy.
Aristotle's critics
(left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of ''The School of Athens'', a fresco by Raphael. Aristotle gestures to the earth, representing his belief in knowledge through empirical observation and experience, whilst Plato points up to the heavens showing his belief in the ultimate truth.
Aristotle has been criticised on several grounds.
His analysis of procreation is frequently criticised on the grounds that it presupposes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive, lumpen female element it is on these grounds that some feminist critics refer to Aristotle as a misogynist.
At times, the objections that Aristotle raises against the arguments of his own teacher, Plato, appear to rely on faulty interpretations of those arguments.
Although Aristotle advised, against Plato, that knowledge of the world could only be obtained through experience, he frequently failed to take his own advice. Aristotle conducted projects of careful empirical investigation, but often drifted into abstract logical reasoning, with the result that his work was littered with conclusions that were not supported by empirical evidence: for example, his assertion that objects of different mass fall at different speeds under gravity, which was later refuted by John Philoponus (credit is often given to Galileo, even though Philopinus lived centuries earlier).
In the Middle Ages, roughly from the 12th century to the 15th century, the philosophy of Aristotle became firmly established dogma. Although Aristotle himself was far from dogmatic in his approach to philosophical inquiry, two aspects of his philosophy might have assisted its transformation into dogma. His works were wide ranging and systematic so that they could give the impression that no significant matter had been left unsettled. He was also much less inclined to employ the skeptical methods of his predecessors, Socrates and Plato.
Some academics have suggested that Aristotle was unaware of much of the current science of his own time.
Aristotle was called not a great philosopher, but "The Philosopher" by Scholastic thinkers. These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages. It required a repudiation of some Aristotelian principles for the sciences and the arts to free themselves for the discovery of modern scientific laws and empirical methods.
The loss of his works
Though we know that Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises (Cicero described his literary style as "a river of gold"), the originals have been lost in time. All that we have now are the literary notes for his pupils, which are often difficult to read (the ''Nicomachean Ethics'' is a good example). It is now believed that we have about one fifth of his original works.
Aristotle underestimated the importance of his written work for humanity. He thus never published his books, except from his dialogues. The story of the original manuscripts of his treatises is described by Strabo in his Geography and Plutarch in his "Parallel Lives, Sulla": The manuscripts were left from Aristotle to Theophrastus, from Theophrastus to Neleus of Scepsis, from Neleus to his heirs. Their descendants sold them to Apellicon of Teos. When Sulla occupied Athens in 86 BC, he carried off the library of Appellicon to Rome, where they were first published in 60 BC from the grammarian Tyrranion of Amisus and then by philosopher Andronicus of Rhodes.
Bibliography
''Note: Bekker numbers are often used to uniquely identify passages of Aristotle. They are identified below where available.''
Major works
The extant works of Aristotle are broken down according to the five categories in the ''Corpus Aristotelicum''. Not all of these works are considered genuine, but differ with respect to their connection to Aristotle, his associates and his views. Some, such as the ''Athenaion Politeia'' or the fragments of other ''politeia'' are regarded by most scholars as products of Aristotle's "school" and compiled under his direction or supervision. Other works, such ''On Colours'' may have been products of Aristotle's successors at the Lyceum, e.g., Theophrastus and Straton. Still others acquired Aristotle's name through similarities in doctrine or content, such as the ''De Plantis,'' possibly by Nicolaus of Damascus. A final category, omitted here, includes medieval palmistries, astrological and magical texts whose connection to Aristotle is purely fanciful and self promotional. Those that are seriously disputed are marked with an asterisk.
Logical writings
Organon (collected works on logic):
(1a) Categories (or ''Categoriae'')
(16a) On Interpretation (or ''De Interpretatione'')
(24a) Prior Analytics (or ''Analytica Priora'')
(71a) Posterior Analytics (or ''Analytica Posteriora'')
(100b) Topics (or ''Topica'')
(164a) On Sophistical Refutations (or ''De Sophisticis Elenchis'')
Physical and scientific writings
(184a) Physics (or ''Physica'')
(268a) On the Heavens (or ''De Caelo'')
(314a) On Generation and Corruption (or ''De Generatione et Corruptione'')
(338a) Meteorology (or ''Meteorologica'')
(391a) On the Cosmos (or ''De Mundo'', or ''On the Universe'')
(402a) On the Soul (or ''De Anima'')
(436a) Little Physical Treatises (or ''Parva Naturalia''):
On Sense and the Sensible (or ''De Sensu et Sensibilibus'')
On Memory and Reminiscence (or ''De Memoria et Reminiscentia'')
On Sleep and Sleeplessness (or ''De Somno et Vigilia'')
On Dreams (or ''De Insomniis'')
On Prophesying by Dreams (or ''De Divinatione per Somnum'')
On Longevity and Shortness of Life (or ''De Longitudine et Brevitate Vitae'')
On Youth and Old Age (On Life and Death) (or ''De Juventute et Senectute'', ''De Vita et Morte'')
On Breathing (or ''De Respiratione'')
(481a) On Breath (or ''De Spiritu'')
(486a) History of Animals (or ''Historia Animalium'', or ''On the History of Animals'', or ''Description of Animals'')
(639a) On the Parts of Animals (or ''De Partibus Animalium'')
(698a) On the Gait of Animals (or ''De Motu Animalium'', or ''On the Movement of Animals'')
(704a) On the Progression of Animals (or ''De Incessu Animalium'')
(715a) On the Generation of Animals (or ''De Generatione Animalium'')
(791a) On Colours (or ''De Coloribus'')
(800a) ''De audibilibus''
(805a) Physiognomics (or ''Physiognomonica'')
On Plants (or ''De Plantis'')
(830a) On Marvellous Things Heard (or ''Mirabilibus Auscultationibus'', or ''On Things Heard'')
(847a) Mechanical Problems (or ''Mechanica'')
(859a) Problems (or ''Problemata'')
(968a) On Indivisible Lines (or ''De Lineis Insecabilibus'')
(973a) Situations and Names of Winds (or ''Ventorum Situs'')
(974a) On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias (or ''MXG'') The section On Xenophanes starts at 977a13, the section On Gorgias starts at 979a11.
Metaphysical writings
(980a) Metaphysics (or ''Metaphysica'')
Ethical writings
(1094a) Nicomachean Ethics (or ''Ethica Nicomachea'', or ''The Ethics'')
(1181a) Great Ethics (or ''Magna Moralia'')
(1214a) Eudemian Ethics (or ''Ethica Eudemia'')
(1249a) Virtues and Vices (or ''De Virtutibus et Vitiis Libellus'', ''Libellus de virtutibus'')
(1252a) Politics (or ''Politica'')
(1343a) Economics (or ''Oeconomica'')
Aesthetic writings
(1354a) Rhetoric (or ''Ars Rhetorica'', or ''The Art of Rhetoric'' or ''Treatise on Rhetoric'')
Rhetoric to Alexander (or ''Rhetorica ad Alexandrum'')
(1447a) Poetics (or ''Ars Poetica'')
A work outside the ''Corpus Aristotelicum''
The Constitution of the Athenians (or ''Athenaion Politeia'', or ''The Athenian Constitution'')
Specific editions
Princeton University Press: ''The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation'' (2 Volume Set Bollingen Series, Vol. LXXI, No. 2), edited by Jonathan Barnes ISBN 0 691 09950 2 (The most complete recent translation of Aristotle's extant works)
Oxford University Press: ''Clarendon Aristotle Series''.
Harvard University Press: ''Loeb Classical Library'' (hardbound publishes in Greek, with English translations on facing pages)
Oxford Classical Texts (hardbound Greek only)
Named for Aristotle
Aristoteles crater on the Moon.
The Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Aristotle's Cockney legacy The name of Aristotle, like that of J. Arthur Rank, became a common expression in Cockney rhyming slang.
See also
Aristotelian view of God
Aristotelian theory of gravity
Philia
Phronesis
Aristotle's theory of potentialiy and actuality
References
Needless to say, the secondary literature on Aristotle is vast. The following references are only a small selection.
cite book
last Adler first Mortimer J.
authorlink Mortimer Adler
title Aristotle for Everybody
publisher Macmillan
location New York
year 1978
A popular exposition for the general reader.
cite book
last Boche ski first I. M.
authorlink I. M. Boche ski
title Ancient Formal Logic
publisher North Holland Publishing Company
location Amsterdam
year 1951
cite book
last Guthrie first W. K. C.
title A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. 6
publisher Cambridge University Press
year 1981
A detailed and scholarly work, but very readable.
cite book
last Melchert first Norman
authorlink Norman Melchert
title The Great Conversation: A Historical Introduction to Philosophy
publisher McGraw Hill
year 2002
id ISBN 0195175107
cite book
last Rose first Lynn E.
authorlink Lynn E. Rose
title Aristotle's Syllogistic
publisher Charles C Thomas Publisher
location Springfield
year 1968
cite book
last Ross first Sir David
authorlink Sir David Ross
title Aristotle
publisher Routledge
edition 6supth sup ed.
location London
year 1995
An classic overview by one of Aristotle's most important English translators, in print since 1923.
cite book
last Taylor first Henry Osborn
authorlink Henry Osborn Taylor
url http: www.ancientlibrary.com medicine index.html
title Greek Biology and Medicine
year 1922
chapter Chapter 3: Aristotle's Biology
chapterurl http: www.ancientlibrary.com medicine 0051.html
cite book
last Turner first William
authorlink William Turner
others Nihil Obstat Remy Lafort, S.T.D. Censor Imprimatur John Cardinal Farley, Abp. of New York
title The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume I: "Aristotle"
publisher Robert Appleton Company
edition 1907
year 1907
location New York
cite book
last Veatch first Henry B.
authorlink Henry Babcock Veatch
title Aristotle: A Contemporary Appreciation
publisher Indiana U. Press
location Bloomington
year 1974
For the general reader.
External links
, 2004.
O'Connor, J. John Robertson, Edmund F., , 2004.
Aristotle
Aristotle
Category:Ancient Greek mathematicians
Category:Ancient Greek philosophers
Category:Aristotelian philosophers
Category:Aristotle
Category:Empiricists
Category:Greek logicians
Category:History of philosophy
Category:History of science
Category:Meteorologists
Category:Rhetoric
Category:Rhetoricians
ar:
bg:
ba:
bs:Aristotel
ca:Arist til
cs:Aristotel s
da:Aristoteles
de:Aristoteles
et:Aristoteles
el:
es:Arist teles de Estagira
eo:Aristotelo
eu:Aristoteles
fa:
fr:Aristote
ga:Arastotail
gl:Arist teles
ko:
hr:Aristotel
io:Aristoteles
id:Aristoteles
is:Arist teles
it:Aristotele
he:
jv:Aristoteles
la:Aristoteles
lv:Aristotelis
lt:Aristotelis
hu:Arisztotel sz
mk:
ms:Aristotle
nl:Aristoteles
nds:Aristoteles
ja:
no:Aristoteles
nn:Aristoteles
pl:Arystoteles
pt:Arist teles
ro:Aristotel
ru:
sq:Aristoteli
simple:Aristotle
sk:Aristoteles
sl:Aristotel
sr:
fi:Aristoteles
sv:Aristoteles
tl:Aristoteles
ta:
th:
vi:Aristotle
tr:Aristoteles
uk:
zh:
: '' ''An American In Paris'' is also a 1951 film musical starring Gene Kelly.''
'''''An American in Paris''''' is a symphonic composition by American composer George Gershwin which debuted in 1928. Inspired by Gershwin's time in Paris, it is in the form of an extended tone poem evoking the sights and energy of the French capital in the 1920s. In addition to the standard instruments of the symphony orchestra, the score features period automobile horns Gershwin brought back some Parisian taxi cab horns for the New York premiere of the composition.
"An American In Paris" is second only to Rhapsody In Blue as a favorite of Gershwin's classical compositions.
The score also features instruments rarely seen in the concert hall: celesta and saxophones.
Category:Compositions by George Gershwin
American in Paris, An
ja:
pl:Amerykanin w Paryu
sv:An American in Paris (symfonisk dikt)
REDIRECT Academy Award for Best Actor
redirect Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
redirect Academy Award for Best Song
The '''Academy Awards''', popularly known as the '''Oscars''', are the most prominent film awards in the United States and arguably the world. The Awards are granted by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, a professional honorary organization which, as of 2003, had a voting membership of 5,816. Actors (with a membership of 1,311) make up the largest voting bloc. The votes have been tabulated and certified by auditing firm PricewaterhouseCoopers since close to the awards' inception.
The next Oscars will take place on Sunday, March 5th, 2006.
Oscar statuette
The official name of the Oscar statuette is the "Academy Award of Merit." Made of gold plated britannium on a black marble base, it is 13.5 inches (34 cm) tall, weighs 8.5 lbs (3.85 kg) and depicts a knight holding a crusader's sword standing on a reel of film. The root of the name "Oscar" is contested. Some believe it comes from Academy librarian Margaret Herrick, who saw it on a table and said, "it looks just like my uncle Oscar!" Others claim that Bette Davis named it after her first husband. However it became, the nickname stuck and is used almost as commonly as ''Academy Award'', even by the Academy itself. In fact, the Academy's domain name is ''oscars.org'' and the official website for the Academy Awards is at ''oscar.com''.
Awards night
The major awards are given out at a ceremony, most commonly in March following the relevant calendar year. This is an elaborate extravaganza, with the invited guests walking up the red carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day. The ceremony and extravagant afterparties, including the Academy's Governors Ball, are televised around the world.
The ceremony has consecutively aired on ABC since 1976.
Nominations
Today, according to Rules 2 and 3 of the official Academy Awards Rules, a film has to open in the previous calendar year (from midnight January 1 to midnight December 31) in Los Angeles County, California, to qualify. Rule 2 states that a film must be "feature length" (defined as 40 minutes) to qualify for an award (except for Short Subject awards, of course). It must also exist either on a 35mm or 70mm film print OR on a 24fps or 48fps progressive scan digital film print with a native resolution no lower than 1280x1024.
The members of the various branches nominate those in their respective fields (actors are nominated by the actors' branch, etc.) while all members may submit nominees for Best Picture. The winners are then determined by a second round of voting in which all members are now allowed to vote in all categories.
Membership
Academy membership may be obtained by one of two ways: a competitive nomination (however, the nominee must be invited to join) or a member may submit a name, seconded by at least two other members, then voted upon by the Board of Governors. The Academy does not publicly disclose its membership, although past press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join. If a person not yet a member is nominated in more than one category in a single year, he she must choose which branch to join when he she accepts membership.
Awards
received five honorary Oscars for contributions to cinema and humanitarian work.
Academy Award of Merit
Current awards
Best Picture 1928 to present
Best Leading Actor 1928 to present
Best Leading Actress 1928 to present
Best Supporting Actor 1936 to present
Best Supporting Actress 1936 to present
Best Animated Feature 2001 to present
Best Art Direction 1928 to present (also called Interior or Set Decoration)
Best Cinematography 1928 to present
Best Costume Design 1948 to present
Best Director 1928 to present
Best Documentary Feature
Best Documentary Short Subject
Best Film Editing 1935 to present
Best Foreign Language Film 1947 to present
Best Makeup 1981 to present
Best Original Score 1934 to present
Best Original Song 1934 to present
Best Original Musical 1934 to present
Best Animated Short Film 1931 to present
Best Live Action Short Film
Best Sound Mixing 1930 to present
Best Sound Editing 1963 to present
Best Visual Effects 1939 to present
Best Adapted Screenplay 1928 to present
Best Original Screenplay 1940 to present
Retired awards
Best Assistant Director 1933 to 1937
Best Dance Direction 1935 to 1937
Best Engineering Effects 1928 only
Best Score Adaptation or Treatment
Best Short Film Color 1936 and 1937
Best Short Film Live Action 2 Reels 1936 to 1956
Best Short Film Novelty 1932 to 1935
Best Original Story 1928 to 1956
Best Title Writing 1928 only
Best Unique and Artistic Quality of Production 1928 only
In the first year of the awards, the Best Director category was split into separate Drama and Comedy categories. At times, the Best Original Score category has been split into separate Drama and Comedy Musical categories. Today, the Best Original Score category is one category. From the 1930s through the 1960s, the Cinematography, Art Direction, and Costume Design awards were split into separate categories for black and white and color films.
Special awards
These awards are voted on by special committees, rather than by the Academy membership as a whole.
Current awards
Academy Honorary Award 1928 to present
Academy Special Achievement Award
Academy Award, Scientific or Technical 1931 to present at three levels
The Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award 1938 to present
The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award
Gordon E. Sawyer Award
Retired awards
Academy Juvenile Award 1934 to 1960
Academy Award statistics
Academy Award statistics: Films receiving 10 or more nominations
Academy Award statistics: Films receiving 8 or more awards
Academy Award statistics: Films receiving awards for Best Picture, Directing, Actor, Actress and Writing
Academy Award statistics: Films receiving 3 or more acting nominations
Academy Award statistics: Actors receiving 5 or more nominations
Academy Award statistics: Actors receiving 2 or more awards
Academy Award statistics: Directors receiving 3 or more nominations
See also
List of Academy Awards ceremonies
List of movies that have won eight or more Academy Awards
List of Academy Award winning movies
78th Academy Awards (2006)
References
Gail, K. Piazza, J. (2002) ''The Academy Awards the Complete History of Oscar.'' Black Dog Leventhal Publishers, Inc.
External links
at The Internet Movie Database
Category:Film awards
ar:
af:Oscar
bg:
bs:Oskar
ca:Premi scar
cs:Oscar
da:Oscar uddeling
de:Oscar
et:Oscar
es:Premios Oscar
eo:Oskar premio
fa:
fr:Oscar du cin ma
kn:
ko:
hr:Oscar
id:Academy Award
ilo:Pammadayaw nga Oscar
it:Premio Oscar
he:
hu:Oscar d j
zh min nan:Oscar Chi ng
nl:Academy Award
ja:
nb:Oscar
pl:Nagroda Akademii Filmowej
pt: scar
ro:Premiul Oscar
fi:Oscar palkinto
sq:Academy Award
simple:Academy Award
sv:Oscar (filmpris)
vi:Gi i Oscar
zh:
'''Animalia''' is an illustrated children's book by Graeme Base. It was published in 1986.
Animalia is an alphabet book and contains twenty six illustrations, one for each letter of the alphabet. Each illustration features an animal from the animal kingdom (A is for alligator, B is for butterfly, etc). The illustrations contain dozens of small objects that the curious reader can try to identify.
Base also published a coloring book version for children to do their own coloring.
External links
Category:Children's books
sk: ivo chy
'''Temps Atomique International''' ('''TAI''') or '''International Atomic Time''' is a very accurate and stable time scale. It is a weighted average of the time kept by about 300 atomic clocks (including a large number of caesium atomic clocks) in over 50 national laboratories worldwide. It has been available since 1955, and became the international standard on which UTC is based on January 1, 1972, as decided by the 14th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM). The International Bureau of Weights and Measures is in charge of the realization of TAI.
The highest precision realization of TAI times can only be determined retrospectively, as the timescale is defined by periodic comparisons among its participating atomic clocks. However, these corrections are usually only needed for applications that require nanosecond scale accuracy. Most time service users use realtime estimates of TAI provided by atomic clocks that have been previously referenced to the composite timescale. GPS is a commonly used realtime source of time traceable back to TAI.
Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) is the basis for legal time throughout much of the world, and always differs from TAI by an integral number of seconds. From 1 January 2006, UTC was behind TAI by 33 seconds. The difference is due to an initial ten second offset on 1 January 1972 when UTC was established and leap seconds, which have been periodically inserted into UTC since the first on 30 June 1972 due to slight irregularities in Earth's rate of rotation. While TAI is a continuous and stable timescale, UTC has intentional discontinuities to keep it from drifting more than 0.9 second from UT1, a timescale defined by the Earth's rotation. Roughly speaking, solar noon (the time at which the sun is directly overhead) would drift away from 12:00:00 without leap second corrections. UT1 is computed by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS). TAI was defined such that TAI UT2 on January 1 1958.
Because UTC is a discontinuous timescale, it is not possible to compute the exact time interval elapsed between two UTC timestamps without consulting a table that describes how many leap seconds occurred during that interval. Therefore, many scientific applications that require precise measurement of long (multi year) intervals use TAI instead. TAI is also commonly used by systems that can not handle leap seconds.
See also
Terrestrial Time
Coordinated Universal Time
Universal Time
Sidereal Time
Time and frequency transfer
Clock synchronization
Network Time Protocol
External links
! Categories
Category:Time scales
! Interwiki
de:Internationale Atomzeit
eo:TAI
es:Tiempo at mico
fr:Temps atomique international
he:
id:Waktu Atom Internasional
ja:
pl:Midzynarodowy czas atomowy
ru:
sk:Medzinrodn atmov as
zh:
sv:TAI
'''Altruism''' is considered a belief, a practice, a habit, or an ethical doctrine. Many cultures and religious traditions judge altruism to be virtuous. In English, the idea was often described as Golden rule of ethics. In Buddhism it is considered a fundamental property of human nature.
''Altruism'' can refer to:
being helpful to other people with little or no interest in being rewarded for one's efforts (the colloquial definition). This is distinct from merely helping others.
actions that benefit others with a net detrimental or neutral effect on the actor, regardless of the actor's own psychology, motivation, or the cause of his or her actions. This type of altruistic behavior is referred to in ecology as ''Commensalism''.
an ethical doctrine that holds that individuals have a moral obligation to help others, if necessary to the exclusion of one's own interest or benefit. One who holds such a doctrine is known as an "altruist."
The concepts have a long history in philosophical and ethical thought, and have more recently become a topic for psychologists, sociologists, evolutionary biologists, and ethologists. While ideas about altruism from one field can have an impact on the other fields, the different methods and focuses of these fields lead to different perspectives on altruism.
Altruism can be distinguished from a feeling of loyalty and duty. Altruism focuses on a moral obligation towards all humanity, while duty focuses on a moral obligation towards a specific individual (e.g. a king), a specific organization (e.g. a government), or an abstract concept (e.g. God, country etc). Some individuals may feel both altruism and duty, while others may not. As opposed to altruism, duty is much easier to enforce by an authority.
Altruism in ethics
''Main article: Altruism (ethical doctrine)''
The word "altruism" (''French, altruisme, from autrui: "other people", derived from Latin alter: "other"'') was coined by Auguste Comte, the French founder of positivism, in order to describe the ethical doctrine he supported. He believed that individuals had a moral obligation to serve the interest of others or the "greater good" of humanity. Comte says, in his Catechisme Positiviste, that ''" the social point of view cannot tolerate the notion of rights, for such notion rests on individualism. We are born under a load of obligations of every kind, to our predecessors, to our successors, to our contemporaries. After our birth these obligations increase or accumulate, for it is some time before we can return any service.... This "to live for others" , the definitive formula of human morality, gives a direct sanction exclusively to our instincts of benevolence, the common source of happiness and duty. Man must serve Humanity, whose we are entirely."'' As the name of the ethical doctrine is "altruism," doing what the ethical doctrine prescribes has also come to be referred to by the term "altruism" serving others through placing their interests above one's own.
However, the idea that one has a moral obligation to serve others is much older than Auguste Comte. For example, many of the world's oldest and most widespread religions (particularly Buddhism and Christianity) advocate it. In the New Testament of the Christian Bible, it is explained as follows:
:"Jesus made answer and said, ''A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance a certain priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And in like manner a Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he was moved with compassion, and came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on them oil and wine and he set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow he took out two shillings, and gave them to the host, and said, Take care of him and whatsoever thou spendest more, I, when I come back again, will repay thee.'' Which of these three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor unto him that fell among the robbers? And he said, He that showed mercy on him. And Jesus said unto him, '''Go, and do thou likewise.'''" ''(Luke 10: 30 37)''
Philosophers who support egoism have argued that altruism is demeaning to the individual and that no moral obligation to help others actually exists. Nietzsche asserts that altruism is predicated on the assumption that others are more important than one's self and that such a position is degrading and demeaning. He also claims that it was very uncommon for people in Europe to consider the sacrifice of one's own interests for others as virtuous until after the advent of Christianity. Ayn Rand argued that altruism is the willful sacrifice of one's values, and represents the reversal of morality because only a rationally selfish ethics allows one to pursue the values required for human life.
Advocates of altruism as an ethical doctrine maintain that one ought to act, or refrain from acting, so that benefit or good is bestowed on other people, if necessary to the exclusion of one's own interests (Note that refraining from murdering someone, for example, is not altruism since he is not receiving a benefit or being helped, as he already has his life this would amount to the same thing as ignoring someone).
Altruism in ethology and evolutionary biology
In the science of ethology (the study of behavior), altruism refers to behavior by an individual that increases the fitness of another individual while decreasing the fitness of the actor. This would appear to be counter intuitive if one presumes that natural selection acts on the individual. Natural selection, however, acts on the gene pool of the subjects, not on each subject individually. Recent developments in game theory have provided some explanations for apparent altruism, as have traditional evolutionary analyses. Among the proposed mechanisms are:
Behavioral manipulation (e.g., by certain parasites that can alter the behavior of the host, see )
Bounded rationality (e.g., Herbert Simon)
Conscience
Indirect reciprocity (e.g., reputation)
Kin selection including eusociality (see also "selfish gene")
Memes (by influencing behavior to favour their own spread, e.g., religion)
Reciprocal altruism, mutual aid
Sexual selection
Strong reciprocity
The study of altruism was the initial impetus behind George R. Price's development of the Price equation which is a mathematical equation used to study genetic evolution. An interesting example of altruism is found in the cellular slime moulds, such as ''Dictyostelium mucoroides''. These protists live as individual amoebae until starved, at which point they aggregate and form a multicellular fruiting body in which some cells sacrifice themselves to promote the survival of other cells in the fruiting body. Social behavior and altruism share many similaraties to the interactions between the many parts (cells, genes) of an organism, but are distinguished by the ability of each individual to reproduce indefinitely without an absolute requirement for its neighbors.
Altruism in psychology and sociology
If one performs an act beneficial to others with a view to gaining some personal benefit, then it is not an altruistically motivated act. There are several different perspectives on how "benefit" (or "interest") should be defined. A material gain (e.g. money, a physical reward, etc.) is clearly a form of benefit, while others identify and include both material and immaterial gains (affection, respect, happiness, satisfaction etc.) as being philosophically identical benefits.
According to ''psychological egoism'', while people can exhibit altruistic ''behavior'', they cannot have altruistic ''motivations''. Psychological egoists would say that while they might very well spend their lives benefitting others with no material benefit (or a material net loss) to themselves, their most basic motive for doing so is always to further their own interests. For example, it would be alleged that the foundational motive behind a person acting this way is to advance their own psychological well being ("good feeling"). Critics of this theory often reject it on the grounds that it is non falsifiable in other words, it is designed in such a way as to be impossible to prove or disprove because immaterial gains such as a "good feeling" cannot be measured or proven to exist in all people performing altruistic acts. Psychological egoism has also been accused of using circular logic: "If a person willingly performs an act, that means he derives personal enjoyment from it therefore, people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment". This statement is circular because its conclusion is identical to its hypothesis (it assumes that people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment, and concludes that people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment).
In contrast to psychological egoism, the ''empathy altruism'' hypothesis states that when an individual experiences empathy towards someone in need, the individual will then be altruistically motivated to help that person that is, the individual will be primarily concerned about that person's welfare, not his or her own.
In common parlance, altruism usually means helping another person without expecting material reward from that or other persons, although it may well entail the "internal" benefit of a "good feeling," sense of satisfaction, self esteem, fulfillment of duty (whether imposed by a religion or ideology or simply one's conscience), or the like. In this way one need not speculate on the motives of the altruist in question.
Humans are not exclusively altruistic towards family members, previous co operators or potential future allies, but can be altruistic towards people they don't know and will never meet. For example, humans donate to international charities and volunteer their time to help society's less fortunate.
It strains plausibility to claim that these altruistic deeds are done in the hope of a return favor. The game theory analysis of this 'just in case' strategy, where the principle would be 'always help everyone in case you need to pull in a favor in return', is a decidedly ''non optimal'' strategy, where the net expenditure of effort (tit) is far greater than the net profit when it occasionally pays off (tat).
According to some, it is difficult to believe that these behaviors are solely explained as indirect selfish rationality, be it conscious or sub conscious. Mathematical formulations of kin selection, along the lines of the prisoner's dilemma, are helpful as far as they go but what a game theoretic explanation glosses over is the fact that altruistic behavior can be attributed to that apparently mysterious phenomenon, the conscience. One recent suggestion, proposed by the philosopher Daniel Dennett, was initially developed when considering the problem of so called 'free riders' in the tragedy of the commons, a larger scale version of the prisoner's dilemma.
In game theory terms, a free rider is an agent who draws benefits from a co operative society without contributing. In a one to one situation, free riding can easily be discouraged by a tit for tat strategy. But in a larger scale society, where contributions and benefits are pooled and shared, they can be incredibly difficult to shake off.
Imagine an elementary society of co operative organisms. Co operative agents interact with each other, each contributing resources and each drawing on the common good. Now imagine a rogue free rider, an agent who draws a favor ("you scratch my back") and later refuses to return it. The problem is that free riding is always going to be beneficial to individuals at cost to society. How can well behaved co operative agents avoid being cheated? Over many generations, one obvious solution is for co operators to evolve the ability to spot potential free riders in advance and refuse to enter into reciprocal arrangements with them. Then, the canonical free rider response is to evolve a more convincing disguise, fooling co operators into co operating after all. This can lead to an evolutionary arms races, with ever more sophisticated disguises and ever more sophisticated detectors.
In this evolutionary arms race, how best might one convince comrades that one ''really is'' a genuine co operator, not a free rider in disguise? One answer is by ''actually making oneself'' a genuine co operator, by erecting psychological barriers to breaking promises, and by advertising this fact to everyone else. In other words, a good solution is for organisms to evolve things that everyone knows will force them to be co operators and to make it obvious that they've evolved these things. So evolution will produce organisms who are sincerely moral and who wear their hearts on their sleeves in short, evolution will give rise to the phenomenon of conscience.
This theory, combined with ideas of kin selection and the one to one sharing of benefits, may explain how a blind and fundamentally selfish process can produce a genuinely non cynical form of altruism that gives rise to the human conscience.
Critics of such technical game theory analysis point out that it appears to forget that human beings are rational and emotional. To presume an analysis of human behaviour without including human rationale or emotion is necessarily unrealistically narrow, and treats human beings as if they are mere machines, sometimes called Homo economicus. Another objection is that often people donate anonymously, so that it is impossible to determine if they really did the altruistic act.
Beginning with an understanding that rational human beings benefit from living in a benign universe, logically it follows that particular human beings may gain substantial emotional satisfaction from acts which they perceive to make the world a better place.
Comparison of Altruism and Tit for Tat
Studying the simple strategy "Tit for tat" in the
iterated prisoner's dilemma problem, game theorists argue that
"Tit for tat" is much more successful in establishing stable cooperation among
individuals than altruism, defined as ''unconditional'' cooperation, can ever be.
"Tit for tat" starts with cooperation in the first
step (as altruism does) and then just imitates the behaviour of the partner step by step. If the partner
cooperates, then he ''rewards'' him with cooperation, if he doesn't, then he
''punishes'' him by not cooperating in the next step.
Confronted with many strategies that try to exploit or abuse cooperation of others, this
simple strategy surprisingly proved to be the most successful (see The Evolution of Cooperation).
It was even more successful than these abusing strategies, while unconditional cooperativity (altruism) was
one of the most unsuccessful strategies.
Confronted with altruistic behaviour, Tit for tat is indistinguishable from
pure altruism. Robert Axelrod and Richard Dawkins also showed that
altruism may be harmful to society by nourishing exploiters and abusers (and making them more and
more powerful until they can force everyone to cooperate unconditionally), which
is not the case for "Tit for tat". (See also comparison of entrepreneur and entredonneur)
In the context of biology, the "Tit for tat" strategy is also called reciprocal altruism.
Altruism in politics
table border
tr
td colspan '2' align 'center''''There is currently a POV dispute as to the wording of the section shown below.''' td
tr
tr
td valign 'top'
If one is an adherent to the ''ethical doctrine'' called altruism (that people have an ethical obligation to help or further the welfare of others), then one will support the kind of politics that one believes to be most effective in furthering the welfare of others, regardless of the effect this may have on oneself. Since there is no general consensus on what kind of politics results in the greatest benefit for others, different altruists may have very different political views.
With regard to their political convictions, altruists may be divided in two broad groups: Those who believe altruism is a matter of personal choice (and therefore selfishness can and should be tolerated), and those who believe that altruism is a moral ideal which should be embraced, if possible, by all human beings.
A prominent example of the former branch of altruist political thought is Lysander Spooner, who, in ''Natural Law'', writes: "''Man, no doubt, owes many other moral duties to his fellow men such as to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the homeless, care for the sick, protect the defenceless, assist the weak, and enlighten the ignorant. But these are simply moral duties, of which each man must be his own judge, in each particular case, as to whether, and how, and how far, he can, or will, perform them.''"
The latter branch of altruist political thought, on the other hand, argues that egoism should be actively discouraged, and that altruists have a duty not only to help other people, but to teach those people to help each other as well. Thus, in politics, these altruists almost always take a left wing stance, ranging from moderate social democracy to socialism or even communism. Moderate altruists of this branch may argue for the creation of taxation funded government programs aimed at benefiting the needy (for example transfer payments, such as social welfare, or public healthcare and public education). Less obvious things such as a law that motorists pull over to let emergency vehicles pass may also be justified by appealing to the altruism ethic. Finally, radical altruists of this branch may take things further and advocate some form of collectivism or communalism.
On a somewhat related note, altruism is often held even by non altruists to be the kind of ethic that should guide the actions of politicians and other people in positions of power. Such people are usually expected to set their own interests aside and serve the populace. When they do not, they may be criticized as defaulting on what is believed to be an ethical obligation to place the interests of others above their own.
td
td valign 'top'
Politicians often speak of a moral obligation of individuals to help others. For example, George Bush, speaking to the United Nations said: "We have a moral obligation to help others and a moral duty to make sure our actions are effective."
If one is an adherent to the ''ethical doctrine'' called altruism (that people have an ethical obligation to help or further the welfare of others), it can become a moral justification for forcing, or advocating forcing individuals to help others. In the realm of politics, the altruist may employ an agent in the form of government to enforce this supposed moral obligation. This is not to say that an ethical altruist will ''necessarily'' force this on anyone. An altruist may allow others the freedom to behave in a manner they believe to be immoral or selfish. In other words, their ethical doctrine would not manifest itself politically.
With regard those who believe benevolence is a moral obligation, altruists may be divided in two broad groups: Those who believe helping others is a moral obligation but should not be enforced on individuals. And, those who believe that since helping others is a moral obligation, forcing individuals to help others if they are not willing on their own is justified.
A prominent example of the former branch of altruist political thought is Lysander Spooner, who, in ''Natural Law'', writes: "''Man, no doubt, owes many other moral duties to his fellow men such as to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the homeless, care for the sick, protect the defenceless, assist the weak, and enlighten the ignorant. But these are simply moral duties, of which each man must be his own judge, in each particular case, as to whether, and how, and how far, he can, or will, perform them.''"
The latter branch of altruist political thought, on the other hand, argues that egoism should be actively discouraged, and that individuals should be forced to help other people. Thus, in politics, these altruists almost always take a left wing stance, ranging from moderate social democracy to socialism or even communism. Moderate altruists of this branch may argue for the creation of taxation funded government programs aimed at benefiting the needy (for example transfer payments, such as social welfare, or public healthcare and public education). Finally, radical altruists of this branch may take things to an extreme and advocate some form of state enforced collectivism, communalism, or communism. This is in line with August Comte's philosophy (who coined the term altruism), which argues against individual rights.
Finally, many believe that helping others or serving society is not a moral obligation at all, but that altrusm is an arbitrary pronouncement not philosophically derivable. These oppose all government enforced charity. Individualist anarchist Pierre Joseph Proudhon in 1847 warns of enforcing charity: "That is why charity, the prime virtue of the Christian, the legitimate hope of the socialist, the object of all the efforts of the economist, is a social vice the moment it is made a principle of constitution and a law that is why certain economists have been able to say that legal charity had caused more evil in society than proprietary usurpation" (''The Philosophy of Poverty'').
Comte asserts that individual rights are not compatible with the supposed obligation to serve others. Some argue that the ethical doctrine, if taken to its logical conclusion, leads to tyranny.
td
tr
table
Altruism and religion
All the major world religions promote altruism as a very important moral value. Christianity and Buddhism place particular emphasis on altruistic morality, as noted above, but Judaism, Islam and Hinduism also promote altruistic behavior.
The Good Samaritan is a famous New Testament parable appearing only in the Gospel of Luke (10:25 37). The parable is told by Jesus illustrating altruism.
! This section should continue by quoting altruism related verses from the holy books of the aforementioned religions
See also
Altruism (ethical doctrine)
Altruism in animals
Psychology
Euphemism
Will (law)
Trust (law)
Tit for tat
Reciprocal altruism
External links
References
Batson, C.D. (1991). ''The altruism question''. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fehr, E. 791.
August Comte, ''Catechisme positiviste'' (1852) or ''Catechism of Positivism'', tr. R. Congreve, (London: Kegan Paul, 1891)
Oord, Thomas Jay, Science of Love (Philadelphia: Templeton Foundation Press, 2004).
Nietzsche, Friedrich, ''Beyond Good and Evil''
Pierre Joseph Proudhon, ''The Philosophy of Poverty'' (1847)
Lysander Spooner, ''Natural Law''
Ayn Rand, ''The Virtue of Selfishness''
Matt Ridley, ''The Origins Of Virtue''
Oliner, Samuel P. and Pearl M. Towards a Caring Society: Ideas into Action. West Port, CT: Praeger, 1995.
''The Evolution of Cooperation'', Robert Axelrod, Basic Books, ISBN 0465021212
''The Selfish Gene'', Richard Dawkins (1990), second edition includes two chapters about the evolution of cooperation, ISBN 0192860925
Robert Wright, ''The moral animal'', Vintage, 1995, ISBN 0679763996.
Category:Ethics
Category:Evolutionary biology
Category:philanthropy
Category:Social philosophy
Category:Social psychology
Category:Sociology
Category:Virtues
Category:Motivation
bg:
de:Altruismus
es:Altruismo
fi:Altruismi
fr:Altruisme
he:
it:Altruismo
lt:Altruizmas
nl:Altru sme
pl:Altruizm
sv:Altruism
'' at the 73rd Academy Awards
'''Ang Lee''' (Chinese: Pinyin: L n ) (born October 23, 1954) is an Academy Award winning film director from Taiwan.
Early life
Ang Lee was born and raised in Pingtung, Taiwan and educated in the United States, where he found success as a Hollywood director, well known for his wuxia film ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'' (2000).
He completed his bachelor's degree in Theater from the University of Illinois and received his MFA from New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where in 1984 he made a thesis film called ''Fine Line''. He was a classmate of Spike Lee and worked on the crew of the latter Lee's thesis film, ''Joe's Bed Stuy Barbershop: We Cut Heads''.
Career
Many of his films have focused on the interactions between modernity and tradition. His films have also tended to have a light hearted comic tone which marks a break from the tragic historical realism which characterized Taiwanese filmmaking after the end of the martial law period in 1987. Lee's films also tend to draw on deep secrets and internal torment that begin to come to the surface such as the gay themed films ''The Wedding Banquet'' (1993), ''Brokeback Mountain'' (2005), the martial arts epic ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'' (2000) and the comic book adaptation ''Hulk'' (2003)
He received the Dartmouth Film Award in 2002, along with Meryl Streep.
Lee's film ''Brokeback Mountain'' (2005) won the best film award at the Venice International Film Festival and was named 2005's best film by the Los Angeles film critics. It also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture Drama, with Lee winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Director. Lee also won the Best Director award for the film at the 2006 British Academy Awards (BAFTAs). In January 2006, Brokeback scored a leading 8 Academy Award nominations including Lee for Best Director. The film is considered to be the frontrunner for the March 5, 2006 ceremony. He taught Meryl Streep's son and Kai Christophe Wong, initially scheduled for the lead in ''Dark Matter''.
Private life
His wife, Jane, is a microbiologist they have two children, Haan and Mason.
He is a huge fan of the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League. He kept his directing aspirations a secret because his culture did not encourage ambitions in a non practical career like film.
Films
Director
''Hulk 2'' (2007)
''Brokeback Mountain'' (2005)
''Hulk'' (2003)
''The Hire'' (BMW Short Movies) Chosen (2002)
''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'' (Chinese: ) (2000)
''Ride with the Devil'' (1999)
''The Ice Storm'' (1997)
''Sense and Sensibility'' (1995)
''Eat Drink Man Woman'' (Chinese: ) (1994)
''The Wedding Banquet'' (Chinese: ) (1993)
''Pushing Hands'' (Chinese: ) (1992)
''Fine Line'' (1984)
''Shades of the lake'' (1982)
''I Love Chinese Food'' (1981)
''Beat the Artist'' (1981)
''The Runner''' (1980)
''One Day of Ma Chuan Chen'' (Chinese: )
''Laziness in a Saturday Afternoon'' (Chinese: )
''See Also:'' Films directed by Ang Lee
Writer
''Siao Yu'' (Chinese: ) (1995)
''Eat Drink Man Woman'' (Chinese: ) (1994)
''The Wedding Banquet'' (Chinese: ) (1993)
''Pushing Hands'' (Chinese: ) (1992)
Actor
''The Wedding Banquet'' (Chinese: ) (1993)
''The Hulk''(2003)
Editing
''Eat Drink Man Woman'' (Chinese: ) (1994)
''Pushing Hands'' (Chinese: ) (1992)
Producer
''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'' (Chinese: ) (2000)
''Siao Yu'' (Chinese: ) (1995)
External links
(Chinese)
Lee, Ang
Lee, Ang
Lee, Ang
Lee, Ang
Lee, Ang
Lee, Ang
Category:Best Director Golden Globe
Category:Best Director Oscar nominees
de:Ang Lee
es:Ang Lee
et:Ang Lee
fi:Ang Lee
fr:Ang Lee
hr:Ang Lee
it:Ang Lee
ja:
ka:
nl:Ang Lee
pt:Ang Lee
zh:
REDIRECT Auto racing
Infobox Philosopher
! Scroll down to edit this page
! Philosopher Category
region Western Philosophy
era Contemporary philosophy,
color B0C4DE
! Image and Caption
image name Ayn Rand1.jpg
image caption Ayn Rand: novelist and philosopher
! Information
name Ayn Rand
birth February 2, 1905
death March 6, 1982
school tradition Objectivist philosophy
main interests Objectivist metaphysics, Objectivist ethics
influences Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Nietzsche
influenced Leonard Peikoff, Harry Binswanger, John Ridpath, Tara Smith, David Kelley, Dr. Frank R. Wallace
notable ideas Rational self interest
'''Ayn Rand''' (, March 6 1982), born '''Alissa Zinovievna Rosenbaum''', was best known for her philosophy of Objectivism and her novels ''We the Living'', ''Anthem'', ''The Fountainhead'', and ''Atlas Shrugged''. Her philosophy and her fiction both emphasize, above all, the concepts of individualism, rational egoism ("rational self interest"), and capitalism, which she believed should be implemented fully via ''Laissez faire'' capitalism. Her politics has been described as minarchism and libertarianism, though she never used the first term and detested the second.
Her novels were based upon the projection of the Randian hero, a man whose ability and independence causes conflict with the masses, but who perseveres nevertheless to achieve his values. Rand viewed this hero as the ideal, and the express goal of her fiction was to showcase such heroes.
She believed:
That man must choose his values and actions by reason
That the individual has a right to exist for his own sake, neither sacrificing self to others nor others to self and
That no one has the right to seek values from others by physical force, or impose ideas on others by physical force.
Biography
Early life
Rand was born in Saint Petersburg, Russia, and was the eldest of three daughters of a Jewish family. Her parents were agnostic and largely non observant. From an early age, she displayed a strong interest in literature and films. She started writing screenplays and novels from the age of seven. Her mother taught her French and subscribed to a magazine featuring stories for boys, where Rand found her first childhood hero: Cyrus Paltons, an Indian army officer in a Rudyard Kipling style story called "The Mysterious Valley". Throughout her youth, she read the novels of Sir Walter Scott, Alexandre Dumas and other Romantic writers, and expressed a passionate enthusiasm toward the Romantic movement as a whole. She discovered Victor Hugo at the age of thirteen, and fell deeply in love with his novels. Later, she cited him as her favorite novelist and the greatest novelist of world literature. She studied philosophy and history at the University of Petrograd. Her major literary discoveries in university were the works of Edmond Rostand, Friedrich Schiller and Fyodor Dostoevsky. She admired Rostand for his richly romantic imagination and Schiller for his grand, heroic scale. She admired Dostoevsky for his sense of drama and his intense moral judgments, but was deeply against his philosophy and his sense of life. She continued to write short stories and screenplays and wrote sporadically in her diary, which contained intensely anti Soviet ideas. She also encountered the philosophical ideas of Nietzsche, and loved his exaltation of the heroic and independent individual who embraced egoism and rejected altruism in ''Thus Spoke Zarathustra''. Though an early fan of Nietzsche, she eventually became critical, seeing his philosophy as emphasizing emotion over reason. Nevertheless, as Allan Gotthelf points out in book ''On Ayn Rand'', "the influence was real." She did still retain an admiration for some of his ideas, and quoted Nietzsche in the introduction to the 25th aniversary edition of ''The Fountainhead'': "''The noble soul has reverence for itself.''" Her greatest influence by far is Aristotle, especially ''Organon (Logic)''. Although Leonard Peikoff, promoter of her ideas, says she is the greatest philosopher who ever lived, she herself considered Aristotle the greatest philosopher ever, and stated that he was the only philosopher who had influenced her (this is probably because, as she has stated, she did not include her own work when analyzing the culture.) She then entered the State Institute for Cinema Arts in 1924 to study screenwriting in late 1925, however, she was granted a visa to visit American relatives. She arrived in the United States in February 1926, at the age of twenty one. After a brief stay with her relatives in Chicago, she resolved never to return to the Soviet Union, and set out for Hollywood to become a screenwriter. She then changed her name to "Ayn Rand". There is a story told that she named herself after the Remington Rand typewriter, but she began using the name Ayn Rand before the typewriter was first sold. She stated that her first name, 'Ayn', was an adaptation of the name of a Finnish writer. This may have been the Finnish Estonian author Aino Kallas, but variations of this name are common in Finnish speaking regions.
Major works
Initially, Rand struggled in Hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses. While working as an extra on Cecil B. DeMille's ''King of Kings'', she intentionally bumped into an aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor, who caught her eye. The two married in 1929. In 1931, Rand became a naturalized citizen of the United States. Her first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay ''Red Pawn'' in 1932 to Universal Studios. Rand then wrote the play ''The Night of January 16th'' in 1934, which was highly successful, and published two novels, ''We the Living'' (1936), and ''Anthem'' (1938). While ''We the Living'' met with mixed reviews in the U.S. and positive reviews in the U.K., ''Anthem'' received significiant and positive reviews only in England, due in part to its odd publication history. She was up against The Red Decade in America, and ''Anthem'' did not even find a publisher in the United States it was first published in England. Besides, Rand had still not perfected her literary style and these novels cannot be considered representative.
Without Rand's knowledge or permission, ''We The Living'' was made into a pair of films, ''Noi vivi'' and ''Addio, Kira'' in 1942 by Scalara Films, Rome. They were nearly censored by the Italian government under Benito Mussolini, but they were permitted because the novel upon which they were based was anti Soviet. The films were successful and the public easily realized that they were as much against Fascism as Communism, and the government banned them quickly thereafter. These films were re edited into a new version which was approved by Rand and re released as ''We the Living'' in 1986.
Rand's first major professional success came with her best selling novel ''The Fountainhead'' (1943), which she wrote over a period of seven years. The novel was rejected by twelve publishers, who thought it was too intellectual and opposed to the mainstream of American thought. It was finally accepted by the Bobbs Merrill Company publishing house, thanks mainly to a member of the editorial board, Archibald Ogden, who praised the book in the highest terms and finally prevailed. Eventually, ''The Fountainhead'' was a worldwide success, bringing Rand fame and financial security.
The theme of ''The Fountainhead'' is "individualism and collectivism in man's soul". It features the lives of five main characters. The hero, Howard Roark, is Rand's ideal, a noble soul ''par excellence'', an architect who is firmly and serenely devoted to his own ideals and believes that no man should copy the style of another in any field, especially architecture. All the other characters in the novel demand that he renounce his values, but Roark maintains his integrity. Unlike traditional heroes who launch into long and passionate monologues about their integrity and the unfairness of the world Roark, in contrast, does it with a disdainful, almost contemptuous taciturnity and laconicism.
Rand's magnum opus, ''Atlas Shrugged'', was published in 1957, becoming an international bestseller. ''Atlas Shrugged'' is often seen as Rand's most complete statement of the Objectivist philosophy in any of her works of fiction. In its appendix, she offered this summary:
:"My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute."
The theme of ''Atlas Shrugged'' is "The role of man's mind in society". Rand upheld the industrialist as one of the most admirable members of any society and fiercely opposed the popular resentment accorded to industrialists. This led her to envision a novel wherein the industrialists of America go on strike and retreat to a mountainous hideaway. The American economy and its society in general slowly start to collapse. The government responds by increasing the already stifling controls on industrial concerns. The novel deals with issues as complex and divergent as sex, music, medicine, politics, and human ability.
Along with Nathaniel Branden, his wife Barbara, and others including Alan Greenspan and Leonard Peikoff, (jokingly designated "The Collective"), Rand launched the Objectivist movement to promote her philosophy.
The Objectivist movement
''Main article: The Objectivist movement''
In 1950 Rand moved to New York City, where in 1951 she met the young psychology student Nathaniel Branden , who had read her book, ''The Fountainhead'', at the age of 14. Branden, then 19, enjoyed discussing Rand's emerging Objectivist philosophy with her. Together, Branden and some of his other friends formed a group that they dubbed the Collective, which included some participation by future Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan. After several years, Rand and Branden's friendly relationship blossomed into a romantic affair, despite the fact that both were married at the time. Their spouses were both convinced to accept this affair but it eventually led to the separation and then divorce of Nathaniel Branden from his wife. Although one of Rand's most strident philosophical points was never to bow to societal pressure or norms, Ayn Rand abandoned her own name (see top of page), as did Branden (born Nathan Blumenthal).
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Rand developed and promoted her Objectivist philosophy through both her fiction works, and by giving talks at several east coast universities, largely through the Nathaniel Branden Institute ("the NBI") which Branden established to promote her philosophy.
After a convoluted series of separations, Rand abruptly ended her relationship with both Nathaniel Branden and his wife, Barbara Branden, in 1968 when she learned of Nathaniel Branden's affair with Patrecia Scott (this later affair did not overlap chronologically with the earlier Branden Rand affair). Rand refused to have any further dealings with the NBI. She then published a letter in "The Objectivist" announcing her repudiation of Branden for various reasons, including dishonesty, but did not mention their affair or her role in the schism. The two never reconciled, and Branden remained a ''persona non grata'' in the Objectivist movement.
honoring Rand. Art by Nick Gaetano.
Barbara Branden presented an account of the breakup of the affair in her book, ''The Passion of Ayn Rand.'' She describes the encounter between Nathaniel and Rand, saying that Rand slapped him numerous times, and denounced him in these words: "If you have an ounce of morality left in you, an ounce of psychological health you'll be impotent for the next twenty years! And if you achieve any potency, you'll know it's a sign of still worse moral degradation!"
Conflicts continued in the wake of the break with Branden and the subsequent collapse of the NBI. Many of her closest "Collective" friends began to part ways, and during the late 70's, her activities within the formal Objectivist movement began to decline, a situation which increased after the death of her husband in 1979. One of her final projects was work on a television adaptation of ''Atlas Shrugged''.
Rand died of heart failure on March 6, 1982 in New York City, years after having successfully battled cancer, and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery, Valhalla, New York.
and Ayn Rand.
Philosophical influences
Rand rejected virtually all other philosophical schools. She acknowledged a shared intellectual lineage with Aristotle and John Locke, and more generally with the philosophies of the Age of Enlightenment and the Age of Reason. She occasionally remarked with approval on specific philosophical positions of, e.g., Baruch Spinoza and Thomas Aquinas. She seems also to have respected the American rationalist Brand Blanshard. However, she regarded most philosophers as at best incompetent and at worst downright evil. She singled out Immanuel Kant as the most influential of the latter sort.
Nonetheless, there are connections between Rand's views and those of other philosophers. She acknowledged that she had been influenced at an early age by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche. Though she later repudiated his thought and reprinted her first novel, ''We The Living'', with some wording changes in 1959, her own thought grew out of critical interaction with it. Generally, her political thought is in the tradition of classical liberalism. She expressed qualified enthusiasm for the economic thought of Ludwig von Mises and Henry Hazlitt. Though not mentioned as an influence by her specifically, parallels between her works and Ralph Waldo Emerson's essay Self Reliance do exist. Later Objectivists, such as Richard Salsman, have claimed that Rand's economic theories are implicitly more supportive of the doctrines of Jean Baptiste Say, though Rand herself was likely not acquainted with his work.
Politics and House Committee on Un American Activities testimony
Rand's political views were radically pro capitalist, anti statist, and anti Communist. Her writings praised above all the human individual and the creative genius of which one is capable. She exalted what she saw as the heroic American values of egoism and individualism. Rand also had a strong dislike for mysticism, religion, and compulsory charity, all of which she believed helped foster a crippling culture of resentment towards individual human happiness and success. Rand detested many prominent liberal and conservative politicians of her time, even including prominent anti Communist crusaders like Presidents Harry S. Truman and Ronald Reagan, and Senators Hubert H. Humphrey and Joseph McCarthy (although she argued that ''McCarthyism'' was a myth, and that the accusation of McCarthyism was used as an ad hominem argument to discredit anti Communists).
In 1947, during the Red Scare, Rand testified as a "friendly witness" before the House Committee on Un American Activities (see http: www.noblesoul.com orc texts huac.html). Rand's testimony involved analysis of the 1943 film ''Song of Russia''. While many believe that Ayn Rand disclosed the names of members of the Communist Party in the U.S., thus exposing them to blacklisting, her testimony consisted entirely of comments regarding the disparity between her experiences in the Soviet Union and the fanciful portrayal of it in the film.
Rand argued that the movie grossly misrepresented the socioeconomic conditions in the Soviet Union. She told the committee that the film presented life in the USSR as being much better than it actually was. Apparently this 1943 film was intentional wartime propaganda by U.S. patriots, trying to put their Soviet allies in World War II under the best possible light. After the HUAC hearings, when Ayn Rand was asked about her feelings on the effectiveness of their investigations, she described the process as "futile".
Legacy
Rand's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers, including Alan Greenspan. A six foot floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign was placed near her casket.
In 1985, Leonard Peikoff, a surviving member of "The Collective" and Ayn Rand's designated heir, established "The Ayn Rand Institute: The Center for the Advancement of Objectivism" (ARI). The Institute has since registered the name ''Ayn Rand'' as a trademark, despite Rand's desire that her name never be used to promote the philosophy she developed. Rand expressed her wish to keep her name and the philosophy of Objectivism separate to ensure the survival of her ideas.
Another schism in the movement occurred in 1989, when Objectivist David Kelley wrote "A Question of Sanction," , argued that Objectivism is, indeed, a closed system, and that truth and moral goodness are directly related. Peikoff expelled Kelley from his movement, whereupon Kelley founded The Institute for Objectivist Studies (now known as "The Objectivist Center").
Rand and Objectivism are less well known outside North America, although there are pockets of interest in Europe and Australia, and her novels are reported to be popular in India () and to be gaining an increasingly wider audience in Africa. Her work has had little effect on academic philosophy, for her followers are, with some notable exceptions, drawn from the non academic world.
Neil Peart, the drummer and lyricist with the Canadian progressive rock band Rush, was influenced by Rand philosophy during the early years of the band. The most notable instances of this are the track "Anthem" from the album ''Fly By Night'' (1975) and the title track from the album ''2112'' (1976).
Controversy
Rand's views are controversial. Religious and socially conservative thinkers have criticized her atheism. Many adherents and practitioners of continental philosophy criticize her celebration of rationality and self interest. Within the dominant philosophical movement in the English speaking world, analytic philosophy, Rand's work has been mostly ignored. No leading research university in this tradition considers Rand or Objectivism to be an important philosophical specialty or research area, as is documented by Brian Leiter's report , founded in 1987, is affiliated with the American Philosophical Association. In 2006, Cambridge University Press will publish a volume on Rand's ethical theory written by ARI affiliated scholar Tara Smith.
A notable exception to the general lack of attention paid to Rand is the essay "On the Randian Argument" by Harvard University philosopher Robert Nozick, which appears in his collection ''Socratic Puzzles''. Nozick's own libertarian political conclusions are similar to Rand's, but his essay criticizes her foundational argument in ethics, which claims that one's own life is, for each individual, the only ultimate value because it makes all other values possible. To make this argument sound, Nozick argues that Rand still needs to explain why someone could not rationally prefer the state of eventually dying and having no values. Thus, he argues, her attempt to deduce the morality of selfishness is essentially an instance of assuming the conclusion or begging the question and that her solution to David Hume's famous is ought problem is unsatisfactory. Nevertheless, Nozick respected Rand as an author and noted that he found her books enjoyable and thought provoking.
Rand has sometimes been viewed with suspicion for her practice of presenting her philosophy in fiction and non fiction books aimed at a general audience rather than publishing in peer reviewed journals. Rand's defenders note that she is part of a long tradition of authors who wrote philosophically rich fiction including Dante, John Milton, Fyodor Dostoevsky, and Albert Camus, and that other philosophers such as Jean Paul Sartre presented their philosophies in both fictional and non fictional forms.
Other critics argue that Rand s idealistic philosophy and her Romantic literary style are not applicable to the inhabited world. In particular, these critics claim that Rand's novels are made up of unrealistic and one dimensional characters. They criticize the portrayal of the Objectivist heroes as incredibly intelligent, unencumbered by doubt, wealthy, and free of flaws, in contrast to the frequent portrayal of the antagonists as weak, pathetic, full of uncertainty, and lacking in imagination and talent.
Defenders of Rand point out counterexamples to these criticisms: neither Eddie Willers nor Cherryl Taggart (both positive characters) is especially gifted or intelligent, but both are characters of dignity and respect Leo Kovalensky suffers enormously due to his inability to cope with the brutality and banality of communism Andrei Taganov dies after realizing his philosophical errors Dominique Francon is initially bitterly unhappy because she believes evil is powerful Hank Rearden is torn by inner emotional conflict brought on by a philosophical contradiction and Dagny Taggart thinks that she alone is capable of saving the world. Two of her main protagonists, Howard Roark and John Galt, did not begin life wealthy. Though Rand believed that, under capitalism, valuable contributions will routinely be rewarded by wealth, she certainly did not think that wealth made a person virtuous. In fact, she presents many vicious bureaucrats and waspish elitists who use statism to accumulate money and power. Moreover, Hank Rearden is exploited because of his social na vet . As for the purportedly weak and pathetic villains, Rand's defenders point out that Ellsworth Toohey is represented as being a great strategist and communicator from an early age, and Dr. Robert Stadler is a brilliant scientist.
Rand herself replied to these literary criticisms (and in advance of much of them) with her essay "The Goal of My Writing" (1963). There, and in other essays collected in her book ''The Romantic Manifesto: A Philosophy of Literature'' (2nd rev. ed. 1975), Rand makes it clear that her goal is to project her vision of an ideal man: not man as he is, but man as he might and ought to be.
Rand's views on sex have also led to some controversy. According to her, "For a woman ''qua'' woman, the essence of femininity is hero worship the desire to look up to man." (1968) Some in the BDSM community see her work as relevant and supportive, particularly ''The Fountainhead'' .
Another source of controversy is Rand's view that homosexuality is "immoral" and "disgusting" , as well as her support for the right of businesses to discriminate on the basis of homosexuality, such as in their hiring practices. Specifically, she stated that "there is a psychological immorality at the root of homosexuality" because "it involves psychological flaws, corruptions, errors, or unfortunate premises".
On the topic of non governmental discrimination, Rand's defenders argue that her support for its legality was motivated by holding property rights above civil or human rights (as she did not believe that human rights were distinct from property rights) so it did not constitute an endorsement of the morality of the prejudice itself. In support of this, they cite Rand's opposition to some prejudices though not homophobia on moral grounds, in essays like 'Racism' and 'Global Balkanization', while still arguing for the right of individuals and businesses to act on such prejudice without government intervention. .
Bibliography
Fiction
''Night of January 16th'' (1934)
''We The Living'' (1936)
''Anthem'' (1938)
''The Fountainhead'' (1943)
''Atlas Shrugged'' (1957)
Posthumous fiction
''Three Plays'' (2005)
Nonfiction
''For the New Intellectual'' (1961)
''The Virtue of Selfishness'' (with Nathaniel Branden) (1964)
''Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal'' (with Nathaniel Branden, Alan Greenspan, and Robert Hessen) (1966)
''Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology'' (1967)
''The Romantic Manifesto'' (1969)
''The New Left: The Anti Industrial Revolution'' (1971)
''Philosophy: Who Needs It'' (1982)
Posthumous nonfiction
''The Early Ayn Rand'' (edited and with commentary by Leonard Peikoff) (1984)
''The Voice of Reason: Essays in Objectivist Thought'' (edited by Leonard Peikoff additional essays by Leonard Peikoff and Peter Schwartz) (1989)
''Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology'' second edition (edited by Harry Binswanger additional material by Leonard Peikoff) (1990)
''Letters of Ayn Rand'' (edited by Michael S. Berliner) (1995)
''Journals of Ayn Rand'' (edited by David Harriman) (1997)
''Ayn Rand's Marginalia : Her Critical Comments on the Writings of over Twenty Authors'' (edited by Robert Mayhew) (1998)
''The Ayn Rand Column: Written for the Los Angeles Times'' (edited by Peter Schwartz) (1998)
''Russian Writings on Hollywood'' (edited by Michael S. Berliner) (1999)
''Return of the Primitive: The Anti Industrial Revolution'' (expanded edition of ''The New Left'' edited and with additional essays by Peter Schwartz) (1999)
''The Art of Fiction'' (edited by Tore Boeckmann) (2000)
''The Art of Nonfiction'' (edited by Robert Mayhew) (2001)
''The Objectivism Research CD ROM'' (collection of most of Rand's works in CD ROM format) (2001)
''Ayn Rand Answers'' (2005)
References
In addition to Rand's own works (listed above), the following references discuss Rand's life and or literary work. References that discuss her philosophy can be found in the bibliography of work on Objectivism.
div style "font size: 90 "
cite book
last Baker first James T.
authorlink James T. Baker
title Ayn Rand
publisher Twayne
location Boston
year 1987
id ISBN 0 8057 7497 1
cite book
last Branden first Barbara
authorlink Barbara Branden
title The Passion of Ayn Rand
publisher Doubleday Company
location Garden City, New York
year 1986
id ISBN 0 385 19171 5
cite book
last Branden first Nathaniel
authorlink Nathaniel Branden
title My Years with Ayn Rand
publisher Jossey Bass
location San Francisco
year 1998
id ISBN 0 7879 4513 7
cite book
last Branden first Nathaniel
authorlink Nathaniel Branden
coauthors Barbara Branden
title Who Is Ayn Rand?
publisher Random House
location New York
year 1962
cite book
last Britting first Jeff
authorlink Jeff Britting
title Ayn Rand
publisher Overlook Duckworth
location New York
year 2005
id ISBN 1 58567 406 0
cite book
last Gladstein first Mimi Reisel
authorlink Mimi Reisel Gladstein
title The New Ayn Rand Companion
publisher Greenwood Press
location Westport, Connecticut
year 1999
id ISBN 0 313 30321 5
cite book
author Gladstein, Mimi Reisel and Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (editors)
title Feminist Interpretations of Ayn Rand
publisher The Pennsylvania State University Press
location University Park, Pennsylvania
year 1999
id ISBN 0 271 01830 5
cite book
last Hamel first Virginia L.L.
authorlink Virginia L.L. Hamel
title In Defense of Ayn Rand
publisher New Beacon
location Brookline, Massachusetts
year 1990
cite book
last Mayhew first Robert
authorlink Robert Mayhew
title Ayn Rand and Song of Russia
publisher Rowman Littlefield
location Lanham, Maryland
year 2004
id ISBN 0 8108 5276 4
cite book
last Mayhew first Robert
authorlink Robert Mayhew
title Essays on Ayn Rand's Anthem
publisher Rowman Littlefield
location Lanham, Maryland
year 2005
id ISBN 0 7391 1031 4
cite book
last Mayhew first Robert
authorlink Robert Mayhew
title Essays on Ayn Rand's We the Living
publisher Rowman Littlefield
location Lanham, Maryland
year 2004
id ISBN 0 7391 0698 8
cite book
last Paxton first Michael
authorlink Michael Paxton
title Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life (The Companion Book)
publisher Gibbs Smith
location Layton, Utah
year 1998
id ISBN 0 87905 845 5
cite journal
last Peikoff first Leonard
authorlink Leonard Peikoff
title My Thirty Years with Ayn Rand: An Intellectual Memoir
journal The Objectivist Forum
volume 8
issue 3
year 1987
pages 1 16
cite book
last Rothbard first Murray N.
authorlink Murray N. Rothbard
title The Sociology of the Ayn Rand Cult
url http: www.lewrockwell.com rothbard rothbard23.html
publisher Liberty
location Port Townsend, Washington
year 1987
cite book
last Sures first Mary Ann
authorlink Mary Ann Sures
coauthors Charles Sures
title Facets of Ayn Rand
publisher Ayn Rand Institute Press
location Los Angeles
year 2001
id ISBN 0 9625336 5 3
cite book
last Sciabarra first Chris Matthew
authorlink Chris Matthew Sciabarra
title Ayn Rand: The Russian Radical
location University Park, Pennsylvania
publisher The Pennsylvania State University Press
year 1995
id ISBN 0 271 01440 7
cite journal
last Sciabarra first Chris Matthew
authorlink Chris Matthew Sciabarra
title The Rand Transcript
url http: www.nyu.edu projects sciabarra essays randt2.htm
journal The Journal of Ayn Rand Studies
volume 1
issue 1
year 1999
pages 1 26
cite journal
last Shermer first Michael
authorlink Michael Shermer
url http: www.2think.org 02 2 she.shtml
title The Unlikeliest Cult In History
journal Skeptic
volume 2
issue 2
year 1993
pages 74 81
cite book
author Thomas, William (editor)
title The Literary Art of Ayn Rand
location Poughkeepsie, New York
publisher The Objectivist Center
year 2005
id ISBN 1 577240 70 7
cite book
last Tuccile first Jerome
authorlink Jerome Tuccille
title It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand
location New York
publisher Fox Wilkes
year 1997
id ISBN 0930073258
cite book
last Valliant first James S.
authorlink James S. Valliant
title The Passion of Ayn Rand's Critics
location Dallas
publisher Durban House
year 2005
id ISBN 1 930654 67 1
cite book
last Walker first Jeff
authorlink Jeff Walker
title The Ayn Rand Cult
location Chicago
publisher Open Court
year 1999
id ISBN 0 8126 9390 6
div
External links
'''General information'''
'''Organizations promoting Ayn Rand's philosophy'''
Argues that some positions of the Ayn Rand Institute differ from those of Ayn Rand. ! Note that this link is routinely removed as an act of vandalism. It will be routinely reverted, until the vandals give up. If you disagree, take it to Talk.
'''Articles'''
Essay review of ''Ayn Rand'' by Jeff Britting
includes reference to a tribute album, "Concerto of Deliverance", inspired by Rand's words describing such music.
by Jeff Sharlet
An article published in Lingua Franca which covers the arc of her publishing career, while alive and posthomous, as well as the continuing scholarship.
RealVideo discussions on Rand's writing
'''Articles critical of Ayn Rand'''
from of the Critiques of Libertarianism site
from the Objectivism Reference Center site
A critical profile from the London Independent
written in 1972, this was the first piece of Rand revisionism from the libertarian standpoint.
'''Rand's associates'''
'''Online groups and blogs'''
For admirers of Rand's novels, includes member directory, dating service, columns, and news
Online forum for discussion of Ayn Rand and Objectivism.
A large LiveJournal Community for Ayn Rand.
Commentary from a pro capitalist perspective.
The Daily Dose of Reason: psychology, life coaching and comments on cultural political topics from an Objectivist perspective also, The Living Resources Newsletter and Dr. Hurd's publications
E mail based discussion group
Contains abstracts of articles, author bios, links to several articles, and submission guidelines.
Ayn Rand on CD ROM, and links
Contains , blogs, essays, chat room, and a
A list of Rand influenced bloggers
Index of online media references to Ayn Rand and Objectivism
Online columns and discussion, by and for Objectivists hosted by Lindsay Perigo
Daily news and commentary from the Objectivist perspective by e mail
'''Imagery'''
'''Rand's writing and speeches'''
The complete text of the novel, which has fallen into the public domain
Book outline
Book outline
Book outline
Address To The Graduating Class Of The United States Military Academy at West Point, New York March 6, 1974
Transcript
Video outline
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
Rand, Ayn
cs:Ayn Randov
da:Ayn Rand
de:Ayn Rand
es:Ayn Rand
fi:Ayn Rand
fr:Ayn Rand
he:
hu:Ayn Rand
is:Ayn Rand
ja:
nl:Ayn Rand
nn:Ayn Rand
no:Ayn Rand
pl:Ayn Rand
pt:Ayn Rand
sk:Ayn Randov
sv:Ayn Rand
zh:
'''Alain Connes''' (born April 1, 1947) is a French mathematician, currently Professor at the College de France (Paris, France), IHES (Bures sur Yvette, France) and Vanderbilt University (Nashville, Tennessee). He is a specialist of Von Neumann algebras and succeeded in completing the classification of factors of these objects. Although his work in physics was not very convincing he tried to connect the planckian scales with what he called a "2 brane" Universe, model which was largely rejected by string theorists so far.
The remarkable links between this subject, the tools he and others devised to tackle the problem and other subjects in theoretical physics, particle physics, and differential geometry, made him emphasize Noncommutative geometry (which is also the title of his major book to date).
He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982, the Crafoord Prize in 2001 and the gold medal of the CNRS in 2004.
See also
cyclic homology
factor (functional analysis)
Higgs boson
C algebra
M Theory
Groupoid
Jean Louis Loday
External links
Connes, Alain
Connes, Alain
Connes, Alain
Connes, Alain
Connes, Alain
ar:
de:Alain Connes
es:Alain Connes
fr:Alain Connes
ja:
ko:
pl:Alain Connes
zh:
REDIRECT Applied statistics
REDIRECT Arithmetic mean
'''Allan Dwan''' (April 3, 1885 December 21, 1981) was a pioneering Canadian born American motion picture director, producer and screenwriter.
Born '''Joseph Aloysius Dwan''' in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, his family moved to the United States when he was eleven years of age. At university, he trained as an engineer and began working for a lighting company in Chicago, Illinois. However, he had a strong interest in the fledgling motion picture industry and when Essanay Studios offered him the opportunity to become a scriptwriter, he took the job. At that time, some of the East Coast movie makers began to spend winters in California where the climate allowed them to continue productions requiring warm weather. Soon, a number of movie companies worked there year round and, in 1911, Dwan began working part time in Hollywood. While still in New York, in 1917 he was the founding president of the East Coast chapter of the Motion Picture Directors Association.
Allan Dwan became a true innovator in the motion picture industry. After making a series of westerns and comedies, he directed fellow Canadian, Mary Pickford in several very successful movies as well as her husband, Douglas Fairbanks, notably in the acclaimed 1922 ''Robin Hood''.
Following the introduction of the talkies, in 1937 he directed child star Shirley Temple in ''Heidi'' and ''Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm'' the following year.
Over his long and successful career spanning over fifty years, he directed over 400 motion pictures, many of them highly acclaimed, such as the 1949 box office smash, ''The Sands of Iwo Jima''. His last movie was in 1961.
Dwan is one of the directors who spanned the silent to sound era. Most of the silent movies he directed are lost due to poor preservation. Little historical writing has been devoted to Dwan, but some believe that he will be the last "discovered" great director from the Classic Hollywood Era.
He died in Los Angeles at the age of ninety six, and is interred in the San Fernando Mission Cemetery, Mission Hills, California.
Allan Dwan has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6263 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood.
Selected films
As director:
''Manhattan Madness'' (1916)
''Fairbanks Fine Arts'' (1916)
''Fairbanks Fragments'' (1916 1918) also screenwriter
''Robin Hood'' (1922)
''The Iron Mask'' (1929)
''Heidi'' (1937)
''Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm The Little Colonel'' (1938)
''Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm'' (1938)
''The Three Musketeers'' (1939)
''The Gorilla'' (1939)
''Young People'' (1940)
''Look Who's Laughing'' (1941) also producer
''Friendly Enemies'' (1942)
''Around the World'' (1943) also producer
''Up in Mabel's Room'' (1944)
''Abroad With Two Yanks'' (1944)
''Getting Gertie's Garter'' (1945) also screenwriter
''Brewster's Millions'' (1945)
''Driftwood'' (1947)
''Calendar Girl'' (1947)
''Northwest Outpost'' (1947) also associate producer
''Sands of Iwo Jima'' (1949)
''Montana Belle'' (1952)
''Silver Lode'' (1954)
''Passion'' (1954)
''Cattle Queen of Montana'' (1954)
''Tennessee's Partner'' (1955)
''Pearl of the South Pacific'' (1955)
''Escape to Burma'' (1955)
''Slightly Scarlet'' (1956)
''The Restless Breed'' (1957)
''Enchanted Island'' (1958)
See also: Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood
External links
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
Dwan, Allan
de:Allan Dwan
In the '''economy of Algeria''' the hydrocarbons sector is the backbone, accounting for roughly 52 of budget revenues, 25 of GDP, and over 95 of export earnings. Algeria has the fifth largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas exporter it ranks fourteenth for oil reserves. Algiers' efforts to reform one of the most centrally planned economies in the Arab world stalled in 1992 as the country became embroiled in political turmoil.
Burdened with a heavy foreign debt, Algiers concluded a one year standby arrangement with the International Monetary Fund in April 1994 and the following year signed onto a three year extended fund facility which ended 30 April, 1998. Some progress on economic reform, Paris Club debt reschedulings in 1995 and 1996, and oil and gas sector expansion contributed to a recovery in growth since 1995, reducing inflation to approximately 1 and narrowing the budget deficit. Algeria's economy has grown at about 4 annually since 1999. The country's foreign debt has fallen from a high of 28 billion in 1999 to its current level of 24 billion. The spike in oil prices in 1999 2000 and the government's tight fiscal policy, as well as a large increase in the trade surplus and the near tripling of foreign exchange reserves has helped the country's finances. However, an ongoing drought, the after effects of the November 10, 2001 floods and an uncertain oil market make prospects for 2002 03 more problematic. The government pledges to continue its efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector. However, it has thus far had little success in reducing high unemployment, officially estimated at 30 and improving living standards.
President Bouteflika has announced sweeping economic reforms, which, if implemented, will significantly restructure the economy. Still, the economy remains heavily dependent on volatile oil and gas revenues. The government has continued efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector, but has had little success in reducing high unemployment and improving living standards. Other priority areas include banking reform, improving the investment environment, and reducing government bureaucracy.
The government has announced plans to sell off state enterprises: sales of a national cement factory and steel plant have been completed and other industries are up for offer. In 2001, Algeria signed an Association Agreement with the European Union it has started accession negotiations for entry into the World Trade Organization.
Agriculture
Since Roman times Algeria has been noted for the fertility of its soil. About a quarter of the inhabitants are engaged in agricultural pursuits. More than 7,500,000 acres (30,000 km) are devoted to the cultivation of cereal grains. The Tell is the grain growing land. During the time of French rule its productivity was increased substantially by the sinking of artesian wells in districts which only required water to make them fertile. Of the crops raised, wheat, barley and oats are the principal cereals. A great variety of vegetables and of fruits, especially citrus products, is exported.
A considerable amount of cotton was grown at the time of the United States' Civil War, but the industry declined afterwards. In the early years of the 20th century efforts to extend the cultivation of the plant were renewed. A small amount of cotton is also grown in the southern oases. Large quantities of crin vegetal (vegetable horse hair) an excellent fibre, are made from the leaves of the dwarf palm. The olive (both for its fruit and Petroleum) and tobacco are cultivated with great success.
Algeria also exports figs, dates, esparto grass, and cork.
Wine Production
Throughout Algeria the soil favours the growth of vines. The country, in the words of an expert sent to report on the subject by the French government,
:"can produce an infinite variety of wines suitable to every constitution and to every caprice of taste."
The growing of vines was undertaken early by the colonists, but it was not until vineyards in France were attacked by phylloxera that the export of wine from Algeria became significant. In 1883, despite precautionary measures, Algerian vineyards were also attacked but in the meantime the quality of their wines had been proved. In 1850 less than 2000 acres (8 km) were devoted to the grape, but in 1878 this had increased to over 42,000 acres (170 km), which yielded 7,436,000 gallons (28,000 m) of wine. Despite bad seasons and ravages of insects, cultivation extended, and in 1895 the vineyards covered 300,000 acres (1,200 km), the produce being 88,000,000 gallons (333,000 m). The area of cultivation in 1905 exceeded 400,000 acres (1,600 km), and in that year the amount of wine produced was 157,000,000 gallons (594,000 m). By that time the limits of profitable production had been reached in many parts of the country. Practically the only foreign market for Algerian wine is France, which in 1905 imported about 110,000,000 gallons (416,000 m).
Fishing
Fishing is a flourishing but minor industry. Fish caught are principally sardines, bonito, smelt and sprats. Fresh fish are exported to France, dried and preserved fish to Spain and Italy. Coral fisheries are found along the coast from Bona to Tunis.
Minerals
Algeria is rich in minerals the country has many iron, lead and zinc, copper, calamine, antimony and mercury mines. The most productive are those of iron and zinc. Lignite is found in Algiers immense phosphate beds were discovered near Tebessa in 1891, yielding 313,500 tons in 1905. Phosphate beds are also worked near Setif, Guelma and Ain Beida. There are more than 300 quarries which produce, amongst other stones, onyx and beautiful white and red marbles. Algerian onyx from Ain Tekbalet was used by the Romans, and many ancient quarries have been found near Kleber, some being certainly those from which the long lost Numidian marbles were taken. Salt is collected on the margins of the chotts.
Foreign trade
Under French administration the commerce of Algeria developed greatly: the total imports and exports at the time of the French occupation (1830) did not exceed 175,000. In 1850 the figures had reached 5,000,000 in 1868, 12,000,000 in 1880, 17,000,000 and in 1890, 20,000,000. From this point progress was slower and the figures varied considerably year by year. In 1905 the total value of the foreign trade was 24,500,000. About five sixths of the trade is with or via France, into which country several Algerian goods have been admitted duty free since 1851, and all since 1867. French goods, except sugar, have been admitted into Algeria without payment of duty since 1835. After the increase, in 1892, of the French minimum tariff, which applied to Algeria also, foreign trade greatly diminished.
By far Algeria's most significant exports, financially, are petroleum and natural gas. The reserves are mostly in the Eastern Sahara the Algerian government curbed the exports in the 1980s to slow depletion exports increased again somewhat in the 1990s. Other significant exports are sheep, oxen, and horses animal products, such as wool and skins wine, cereals (rye, barley, oats), vegetables, fruits (chiefly figs and grapes for the table) and seeds, esparto grass, oils and vegetable extracts (chiefly olive oil), iron ore, zinc, natural phosphates, timber, cork, crin vegetal and tobacco. The import of wool exceeds the export. Sugar, coffee, machinery, metal work of all kinds, clothing and pottery are largely imported. Of these by far the greater part comes from France. The British imports consist chiefly of coal, cotton fabrics and machinery.
Exports
Algeria trades most extensively with France and Italy, in terms of both imports and exports, but also trades with the United States and Spain.
Statistics
Reference
:''See also :'' Algeria
Alegeria
Algeria
Algeria
fr: conomie de l'Alg rie
pt:Economia da Arg lia
ru:
REDIRECT History of Algeria
:''See also :'' Algeria
Infobox Country
native name brAl Jumh r yah al Jaz ir yahbrad D muqr yah ash Sha b yah
common name Algeria
image flag Flag of Algeria.svg
image coat Algeria coa.png
image map LocationAlgeria.png
national motto (translation): The Revolution by the people and for the people
national anthem ''Kassaman small(Qasaman Bin N zil t Il M iq t)''br(smallArabic: ''We Swear By The Lightning That Destroys'')
official languages Arabic
capital Algiers
latd 36 latm 42 latNS N longd 3 longm 13 longEW E
largest city Algiers
government type Democratic Republic
leader titles PresidentbrPrime Minister
leader names Abdelaziz BouteflikabrAhmed Ouyahia
area rank 11th
area magnitude 1 E12
area 2,381,740
percent water negligible
population estimate 32,531,853
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 36th
population census
population census year
population density 13
population density rank 168th
GDP PPP year 2004
GDP PPP 217,224,000,000
GDP PPP rank 38th
GDP PPP per capita 6,799
GDP PPP per capita rank 85th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.722
HDI rank 103rd
HDI category font color " FFCC00"medium font
sovereignty type Independence
established events Declared
established dates From FrancebrJuly 5, 1962
currency Algerian dinar
currency code DA
time zone CET
utc offset 1
time zone DST CET
utc offset DST 1 does not observe
cctld .dz
calling code 213
footnotes
The '''People's Democratic Republic of Algeria''' (Arabic: ''' ''') , or '''Algeria''' (Arabic: ''' '''), is a presidential state in north Africa, and the second largest country on the African continent, Sudan being the largest. It is bordered by Tunisia in the northeast, Libya in the east, Niger in the southeast, Mali and Mauritania in the southwest, and Morocco as well as a few kilometers of its annexed territory, Western Sahara, in the west. Constitutionally, it is defined as an Islamic, Arab, and Amazigh (Berber) country. The name Algeria is derived from the name of the city of Algiers, from the Arabic word ''al jaz ir'', which translates as ''the islands'', referring to the four islands which lay off that city's coast until becoming part of the mainland in 1525.
History
Algeria has been inhabited by Berbers (or Amazigh) since at least 10,000 BC. From 1000 BC on, the Carthaginians became an influence on them, establishing settlements along the coast. Berber kingdoms began to emerge, most notably Numidia, and seized the opportunity offered by the Punic Wars to become independent of Carthage, only to be taken over soon after by the Roman Republic in 200 BC. As the western Roman Empire collapsed, the Berbers became independent again in much of the area, while the Vandals took over parts until later expelled by the generals of the Byzantine Emperor, Justinian I. The Byzantine Empire then retained a precarious grip on the east of the country until the coming of the Arabs in the 8th century.
After some decades of fierce resistance under leaders such as Kusayla and Kahina, the Berbers adopted Islam ''en masse'', but almost immediately expelled the Caliphate from Algeria, establishing an Ibadi state under the Rustamids. Having converted the Kutama of Kabylie to its cause, the Shia Fatimids overthrew the Rustamids, and conquered Egypt. They left Algeria and Tunisia to their Zirid vassals when the latter rebelled and adopted Sunnism, they sent in a populous Arab tribe, the Banu Hilal, to weaken them, thus incidentally initiating the Arabization of the countryside. The Almoravids and Almohads, Berber dynasties from the west founded by religious reformers, brought a period of relative peace and development however, with the Almohads' collapse, Algeria became a battleground for their three successor states, the Algerian Zayyanids, Tunisian Hafsids, and Moroccan Merinids. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Spain started attacking and taking over many coastal cities, prompting some to seek help from the Ottoman Empire.
Algeria was brought into the Ottoman Empire by Khair ad Din and his brother Aruj, who established Algeria's modern boundaries in the north and made its coast a base for the corsairs their privateering peaked in Algiers in the 1600s. Piracy on American vessels in the Mediterranean resulted in the First and Second Barbary War with the United States. On the pretext of a slight to their consul, the French invaded Algiers in 1830 however, intense resistance from such personalities as Emir Abdelkader, Ahmed Bey and Fatma N'Soumer made for a slow conquest of Algeria, not technically completed until the early 1900s when the last Tuareg were conquered.
Meanwhile, however, the French suppressed slavery and made Algeria an integral part of France, a status that would end only with the collapse of the Fourth Republic. Tens of thousands of settlers from France, Italy, Spain, and Malta moved in to farm the Algerian coastal plain and occupy the most prized parts of Algeria's cities, benefiting from the French government's confiscation of communally held land. People of European descent in Algeria (the so called ''pieds noirs''), as well as the native Algerian Jews, were full French citizens starting from the end of the 19th century by contrast, the vast majority of Muslim Algerians (even veterans of the French army) remained outside of French law, possessing neither French citizenship nor the right to vote. Algeria's social fabric was stretched to breaking point during this period: literacy dropped massively, while land confiscation uprooted much of the population.
In 1954, the National Liberation Front (FLN) launched the guerrilla Algerian War of Independence after nearly a decade of urban and rural warfare, they succeeded in pushing France out in 1962. Most of the 1,025,000 ''pieds noirs'', as well as 91,000 ''harkis'' (pro French Muslim Algerians serving in the French Army), together forming about 10 of the population of Algeria in 1962, fled Algeria for France in just a few months in the middle of that year.
'' is a movie about the Algerian War of Independence.
Algeria's first president, the FLN leader Ahmed Ben Bella, was overthrown by his former ally and defense minister, Houari Boum di nne in 1965. Under Ben Bella the government had already become increasingly socialist and dictatorial, and this trend continued throughout Boumedienne's government however, Boumedienne relied much more heavily on the army, and reduced the sole legal party to a merely symbolic role. Agriculture was collectivised, and a massive industrialization drive launched. Oil extraction facilities were nationalized and this increased the state's wealth, especially after the 1973 oil crisis, but the Algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil, bringing hardship when the price collapsed in the 1980s. In foreign policy Algeria was a member and leader of the 'non aligned' nations. A dispute with Morocco over the Western Sahara nearly led to war. Dissent was rarely tolerated, and the state's control over the media and the outlawing of political parties other than the FLN was cemented in the repressive constitution of 1976. Boum dienne died in 1978, but the rule of his successor, Chadli Bendjedid, was little more open. The state took on a strongly bureaucratic character and corruption was widespread.
The modernization drive brought considerable demographic changes to Algeria. Village traditions underwent significant change as urbanization increased, new industries emerged, agriculture was substantially reduced, and education, a rarity in colonial times, was extended nationwide, raising the literacy rate from less than 10 to over 60 . Improvements in healthcare led to a dramatic increase in the birthrate (7 8 children per mother) which had two consequences: a very youthful population, and a housing crisis. The new generation struggled to relate to the cultural obsession with the war years and two conflicting protest movements developed: left wingers, including Berber identity movements, and Islamic 'int gristes'. Both protested against one party rule but also clashed with each other in universities and on the streets during the 1980s. Mass protests from both camps in autumn 1988 forced Benjedid to concede the end of one party rule, and elections were announced for 1991.
In December 1991, the Islamic Salvation Front won the first round of the country's first multiparty elections. The military then canceled the second round, forced then president Bendjedid to resign, and banned the Islamic Salvation Front. The ensuing conflict engulfed Algeria in the violent Algerian Civil War. More than 100,000 people were killed, often in unprovoked massacres of civilians. The question of who was responsible for these massacres remains controversial among academic observers many were claimed by the Armed Islamic Group. After 1998, the war waned, and by 2002 the main guerrilla groups had either been destroyed or surrendered, taking advantage of an amnesty program, though sporadic fighting continued in some areas. Elections resumed in 1995, and in 1999, after a series of short term leaders representing the military, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the current president, was elected. The issue of Berber language and identity increased in significance, particularly after the extensive Kabyle protests of 2001 and the near total boycott of local elections in Kabylie the government responded with concessions including naming of Tamazight (Berber) as a national language and teaching it in schools.
Politics
The head of state is the President of the republic, who is elected to a 5 year term, renewable once. Algeria has universal suffrage. The President is the head of the Council of Ministers and of the High Security Council. He appoints the Prime Minister who is also the head of government. The Prime Minister appoints the Council of Ministers.
The Algerian parliament is bicameral, consisting of a lower chamber, the National People's Assembly (APN), with 380 members and an upper chamber, the Council of Nation, with 144 members. The APN is elected every 5 years.
Throughout the 1960's, Algeria supported many independence movements in sub Saharan Africa, and was a leader in the Non Aligned Movement. While it shares much of its history and cultural heritage with neighbouring Morocco, the two countries have had somewhat hostile relations with each other since Algeria's independence. This is due to two reasons: Morocco's claim to portions of western Algeria (which led to the Sand war in 1963), and Algeria's support for the Polisario, an armed group of Sahrawi refugees seeking independence for the Moroccan ruled Western Sahara, which it hosts within its borders in the city of Tindouf. Tensions between Algeria and Morocco, as well as issues relating to the Algerian Civil War, have put great obstacles in the way of tightening the Maghreb Arab Union, nominally established in 1989 but with little practical weight, with its coastal neighbors.
Provinces
Algeria is divided into 48 ''wilayas'' (provinces):
small1 small Adrar
small2 small A n Defla
small3 small A n T mouchent
small4 small Alger
small5 small Annaba
small6 small Batna
small7 small B char
small8 small B ja a
small9 small Biskra
small10 small Blida
small11 small Bordj Bou Arr ridj
small12 small Bouira
small13 small Boumerd s
small14 small Chlef
small15 small Constantine
small16 small Djelfa
small17 small El Bayadh
small18 small El Oued
small19 small El Tarf
small20 small Gharda a
small21 small Guelma
small22 small Illizi
small23 small Jijel
small24 small Khenchela
small25 small Laghouat
small26 small Mila
small27 small Mostaganem
small28 small Medea
small29 small Muaskar
small30 small M'Sila
small31 small Naama
small32 small Oran
small33 small Ouargla
small34 small Oum el Bouaghi
small35 small Relizane
small36 small Saida
small37 small S tif
small38 small Sidi Bel Abbes
small39 small Skikda
small40 small Souk Ahras
small41 small Tamanrasset
small42 small T bessa
small43 small Tiaret
small44 small Tindouf
small45 small Tipaza
small46 small Tissemsilt
small47 small Tizi Ouzou
small48 small Tlemcen
in alphabetical order.
Geography
Mountains
Most of the coastal area is hilly, sometimes even mountainous, and there are few good harbours. The area just south of the coast, known as the Tell, is fertile. Further south is the Atlas mountain range and the Sahara desert. Algiers, Oran and Constantine are the main cities.
Algeria's climate is arid and hot, although the coastal climate is mild, and the winters in the mountainous areas can be severe. Algeria is prone to sirocco, a hot dust and sand laden wind especially common in summer.
''See also'': Extreme points of Algeria
Economy
The fossil fuels energy sector is the backbone of the economy, accounting for roughly 60 of budget revenues, 30 of GDP, and over 95 of export earnings. Algeria has the fifth largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas exporter it ranks 14th in Petroleum reserves.
Algeria s financial and economic indicators improved during the mid 1990s, in part because of policy reforms supported by the IMF and debt rescheduling from the Paris Club. Algeria s finances in 2000 and 2001 benefited from an increase in oil prices and the government s tight fiscal policy, leading to a large increase in the trade surplus, record highs in foreign exchange reserves, and reduction in foreign debt. The government's continued efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector has had little success in reducing high unemployment and improving living standards. In 2001, the government signed an Association Treaty with the European Union that will eventually lower tariffs and increase trade.
Demographics
coast
About 90 of Algerians live in the northern, coastal area the minority who inhabit the Sahara desert are mainly concentrated in oases, although some 1.5 million remain nomadic or partly nomadic.
Ninety nine percent of the population is classified ethnically as Arab Berber, and religiously as Muslim other religions are restricted to extremely small groups, mainly of foreigners. Europeans account for less than 1 .
Most Algerians are Arab by language and identity, and of mixed Berber Arab ancestry. The Berbers inhabited Algeria before the arrival of Arab tribes during the expansion of Islam, in the 7th century. The issue of ethnicity and language is sensitive after many years of government marginalization of Berber (or Amazigh, as some prefer) culture. Today, the Arab Berber issue is often a case of self identification or identification through language and culture, rather than a racial or ethnic distinction. The 20 or so of the population who self identify as Berbers, and primarily speak Berber languages (such as Tamazight), are divided into several ethnic groups, notably Kabyle (the largest) in the mountainous north central area, Chaoui in the eastern Atlas Mountains, Mozabites in the M'zab valley, and Tuareg in the far south.
Language
The official language is Arabic, spoken natively in dialectal form ("Darja") by some 80 of the population the other 20 or so speak Berber (Tamazight), officially a national language. French is the most widely studied foreign language (distantly followed by English), but is very rare as a native language. Since independence, the government has pursued a policy of linguistic Arabization of education and bureaucracy, with some success, although many university courses continue to be taught in French.
Culture
in Algiers
Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic and French, has been strongly influenced by the country's recent history. Famous novelists of the 20th century include Mohammed Dib and Kateb Yacine, while Assia Djebar is widely translated. Important novelists of the 1980s included Rachid Mimouni, later vice president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views. As early as Roman times, Apuleius, born in Mdaourouch, was native to what would become Algeria.
In philosophy and the humanities, Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are noted for their thoughts on decolonization, while Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (about 60 miles from the present day city of Annaba), and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while staying in Algeria.
Algerian culture has been strongly influenced by Islam, the main religion. The works of the Sanusi family in precolonial times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times, are widely noted.
The Algerian musical genre best known abroad is ra , a pop flavored, opinionated take on folk music, featuring international stars such as Khaled and Cheb Mami. However, in Algeria itself the older, highly verbal chaabi style remains more popular, with such stars as El Hadj El Anka or Dahmane El Harrachi, while the tuneful melodies of Kabyle music, exemplified by Idir, Ait Menguellet, or Loun s Matoub, have a wide audience. For more classical tastes, Andalusi music, brought from Al Andalus by Morisco refugees, is preserved in many older coastal towns.
In painting, Mohammed Khadda and M'hemed Issiakhem are notable in recent years.
Picture gallery
gallery
Image:Houbel.JPG ''The Monument of the Martyrs Algiers''
Image:Algernuit.jpg ''Algiers by night''
Image:Finace.jpg ''Minister of the finances''
Image:Makam Echehid.jpg ''Algiers view by air''
Image:Benyen.JPG ''the Forest Bainem in Algeria at (Bouzareah)''
Image:Algierssnow.jpg ''Snow on Algiers''
Image:Church Saintcharlesalgiers.jpg ''The church Saint charles at Algiers''
Image:PE Algerie Sahara 0121.JPG ''Sahara of Algeria''
gallery
Miscellaneous topics
Archeology of Algeria
Communications in Algeria
Foreign relations of Algeria
List of Algeria related topics
List of cities in Algeria
List of Algerians
List of sovereign states
Military of Algeria
Transportation in Algeria
''The Battle of Algiers'' movie
Algerian War of Independence (1954 1962)
Algerian Civil War (1991 2002)
Directories
External links
'''Government'''
official presidential site (in French and Arabic)
official parliamentary site
'''News'''
news headline links
business news
'''Overviews'''
data as of December 1993
an irreverent look at Algeria's military situation
'''Tourism'''
'''Other'''
human rights organization critical of widespread torture practiced by the r gime (in French)
Analysis on the public referendum held 29 September 2005 by Veerle Opgenhaffen and Hanny Megally
Category:African Union member states
Category:Arab League
Category:Peace and Security Council
af:Algeri
am:
an:Alcheria
ar:
ast:Arxelia
bn:
bs:Al ir
ca:Alg ria
cs:Al rsko
cy:Algeria
da:Algeriet
de:Algerien
el:
eo:Al erio
es:Argelia
et:Al eeria
fa:
fi:Algeria
fr:Alg rie
gl:Alxeria
ha:Aljeriya
haw: Alekelia
he: '
hi:
ht:Aljeri
ia:Algeria
id:Aljazair
io:Aljeria
is:Als r
it:Algeria
ja:
ko:
kw:Aljeri
la:Algeria
li:Algerie
lt:Al yras
lv:Al rija
mk:
ms:Algeria
na:Algeria
nds:Algerien
nl:Algerije
nn:Algerie
no:Algerie
pl:Algieria
pt:Arg lia
rm:Algeria
ro:Algeria
ru:
sa:
scn:Algiria
simple:Algeria
sk:Al rsko
sl:Al irija
so:Aljeeriya
sq:Algjeria
sr:
sv:Algeriet
tg:
th:
tl:Algeria
tr:Cezayir
ur:
wa:Aldjereye
yi:
zh:
zh min nan:Algeria
'''Characters in Ayn Rand's novel, Atlas Shrugged.'''
Balph Eubank
Called "the literary leader of the age", despite the fact that he is incapable of writing anything that people actually want to read. What people ''want'' to read, he says, is irrelevant. He complains that it is disgraceful that artists are treated as peddlers, and that there should be a law limiting the sales of books to ten thousand copies. He is a member of the ''Looters''. Balph Eubank appears in section 161.
Ben Nealy
A railroad contractor whom ''Dagny Taggart'' hires to replace the track on the Rio Norte Line with Rearden Metal. Nealy is incompetent, but Dagny can find no one better in all the country. Nealy believes that anything can get done with enough muscle power. He sees no role for intelligence in human achievement, and this is manifest in his inability to organize the project and to make decisions. He relies on Dagny and ''Ellis Wyatt'' to run things, and resents them for doing it, because it appears to him like they are just bossing people around. Ben Nealy appears in section 171.
Bertram Scudder
Editorial writer for the magazine ''The Future''. He typically bashes business and businessmen, but he never says anything specific in his articles, relying on innuendo, sneers, and denunciation. He wrote a hatchet job on ''Hank Rearden'' called ''The Octopus''. He is also vocal in support of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. Bertram Scudder appears in section 161.
Betty Pope
A wealthy socialite who is having a meaningless sexual affair with ''James Taggart'' that coincides with the overall meaninglessness of her life. She regrets having to wake up every morning because she has to face another empty day. She is deliberately crude in a way that casts ridicule on her high social position. Betty Pope appears in sections 142 and 161.
Brakeman
An unnamed employee working on the Taggart Comet train. ''Dagny Taggart'' hears Brakeman whistling the theme of a concerto. When she asks him what piece it is from, he says it is Halley's Fifth Concerto. When Dagny points out that ''Richard Halley'' only wrote four concertos, Brakeman claims he made a mistake and he doesn't recall where he heard the piece.
Later, after Dagny instructs the train crew how to proceed, he asks a co worker who she is, and learns she is the one who runs Taggart Transcontinental.
It is later discovered that the unknown brakeman is one of the strikers, when Dagny meets him in the valley. Brakeman appears in sections 112 and 113.
Cherryl Brooks
Dime store shopgirl who marries James Taggart after a chance encounter in her store the night the John Galt Line was deemed his greatest success. She marries him thinking he is the heroic person behind Taggart Transcontinental. She is horrible to Dagny until the night before she commits suicide, when she confesses to Dagny that she married Jim, thinking she was marrying Dagny. Like Eddie Willers, Cherryl is one representation of a "good" person who lacks the extraordinary capacities of the primary heroes of the novel.
Claude Slagenhop
The president of political organization Friends of Global Progress (which is supported by ''Philip Rearden''), and one of ''Lillian Rearden's'' friends. He believes that ideas are just air, that this is no time for talk, but for action. He is not bothered by the fact that action unguided by ideas is random and pointless. Global Progress is a sponsor of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. Claude Slagenhop appears in section 161.
Cuffy Meigs
A looter who's assigned by Wesley Mouch to keep watch over the workings of ''Taggart Transcontinental,'' and later assumes control over the company after Dagny Taggart leaves. He carries a pistol and a lucky rabbit's foot, he dresses in a military uniform. The "intellectual heir" of Dr. Robert Stadler, Meigs comes to a fitting end at the hands of ''Project X.''
Dagny Taggart
The main character in Atlas Shrugged (also the name of her namesake ''Mrs. Nathaniel Taggart''). Dagny is Vice President in Charge of Operation at Taggart Transcontinental. She is the female hero, the counterpart to John Galt, her journey is the journey of the reader exploring and understanding Galts philosophy. Those in the know understand that she is the one who really runs the railroad. In the course of the novel, she forms romantic liaisons with three men of ability. Francisco, Hank Rearden and John Galt in order. John is the one who, because of the sum total of his qualities, will become the choice of Dagny. Dagny appears in sections 112, 113, 114, 132, 133, 141, 145, 146, 147, 148, 151, 152, and 161.
Dan Conway
The middle aged president of the Phoenix Durango railroad. Running a railroad is just about the only thing he knows. When the Anti dog eat dog Rule is used to drive his business out of Colorado, he loses the will to fight, and resigns himself to a quiet life of books and fishing. He claims that somebody had to be sacrificed, it turned out to be him, and he has no right to complain, bowing to the will of the majority. When pressed he says he doesn't really believe this is right, but he can't understand why it is wrong and what the alternative might be. He is trapped by a moral code that makes him a willing victim, and rather than challenge that morality, he simply gives up. Dan Conway appears in sections 145 and 146, and is mentioned in section 148.
Dick McNamara
A contractor who finished the San Sebastian Line and who is hired to lay the new Rearden Metal track for the Rio Norte Line. Before he gets a chance to do so, he mysteriously disappears. Dick McNamara is mentioned in sections 133 and 141.
Eddie Willers
Special Assistant to the Vice President in Charge of Operation at Taggart Transcontinental. He grew up with ''Dagny Taggart''. His father and grandfather worked for the Taggarts, and he followed in their footsteps. He is completely loyal to Dagny and to Taggart Transcontinental. He is also secretly in love with Dagny. Willers is generally assumed to represent the common man: someone who does not possess the promethian creative ability of The Strikers, but nevertheless matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations. Eddie Willers appears in sections 111, 114, 117, 132, 133, 141, 151, and 152.
Ellis Wyatt
The head of Wyatt Oil. He has almost single handedly revived the economy of Colorado by discovering oil there. Of all the disappearances of industrialists in the novel, Wyatt's, involving the fiery destruction of his oil wells, is surely the most dramatic. Ellis Wyatt is mentioned or appears in sections 111, 114, 132, 146, 147, 148, and 152.
Francisco d'Anconia
One of the central characters in Atlas Shrugged. By all accounts, he is a worthless millionaire playboy, owner by inheritance of the world's largest copper mining empire, the man behind the San Sebastian Mines, and a childhood friend and first love of ''Dagny Taggart''.
Francisco began working on the sly as a teenager in order to learn all he could about business. While still a student at Patrick Henry University, he began working at a copper foundry, and investing in the stock market. By the time he was twenty he had made enough to purchase the foundry. He began working for d'Anconia Copper as assistant superintendent of a mine in Montana, but was quickly promoted to head of the New York office. He took over d'Anconia Copper at age 23, after the death of his father.
When he was 26, Francisco secretly joined the ''Strikers'' and began to slowly destroy the d'Anconia empire so the ''Looters'' could not get it. He adopted the persona of a worthless playboy, by which he is known to the world, as an effective cover.
His full name is Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia.
''According to mailto:areed2 calstatela.edu Adam Reed (), d'Anconia is the only Hero class character who is recognizably Jewish (not in the religious, but in the historical sense, like Ayn Rand herself).'' Francisco D'Anconia appears or is mentioned in sections 132, 141, 144, 151, and 152 this last section includes a detailed history of his life.
Hank Rearden
One of the central characters in Atlas Shrugged. He is the founder of Rearden Steel and the inventor of Rearden Metal. He lives in Philadelphia with his wife ''Lillian'', his brother ''Philip'', and an elderly woman known only as ''Rearden's Mother'', all of whom he supports. Gwen Ives is his secretary.
The character of Hank Rearden has two important roles to play in the novel. First, he is in the same position as the reader in that he is aware that there is something wrong with the world but is not sure what it is. Rearden is guided toward an understanding of the solution through his friendship with ''Francisco d'Anconia'', who does know the secret, and by this mechanism the reader is also prepared to understand the secret when it is revealed explicitly in Galt's Speech.
Second, Rearden is used to illustrate Rand's theory of sex. ''Lillian Rearden'' cannot appreciate Hank Rearden's virtues, and she is portrayed as being disgusted by sex. ''Dagny Taggart'' clearly does appreciate Rearden's virtues, and this appreciation evolves into a sexual desire. Rearden is torn by a contradiction because he accepts the premises of the traditional view of sex as a lower instinct, while responding sexually to Dagny, who represents his highest values. Rearden struggles to resolve this internal conflict and in doing so illustrates Rand's sexual theory. Rearden appears in sections 121, 132, 147, and 161, and is mentioned in sections 114 and 131.
Hugh Akston
Identified as "One of the last great advocates of reason." He was a renowned philosopher and the head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University, where he taught ''Francisco d'Anconia'', ''John Galt'', and ''Ragnar Danneskj ld''. He was, along with ''Robert Stadler'', a father figure to these three. Akston's name is so hallowed that a young lady, on hearing that Francisco had studied under him, is shocked. She thought he must have been one of those great names from an earlier century. Hugh Akston is mentioned in section 161.
James Taggart
The President of Taggart Transcontinental and a leader of the ''Looters''. Taggart is an expert influence peddler who is incapable of making decisions on his own. He relies on his sister ''Dagny Taggart'' to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor. In a sense, he is the antithesis of Dagny.
As the novel progresses, the moral philosophy of the Looters is revealed: it is a code of nihilism. The goal of this code is to not exist, to become a zero. Taggart struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal. He maintains his pretence that he wants to live, and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp the truth about himself. This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this. James Taggart appears in sections 111, 114, 131, 132, 143, 144, 152 and 161, and is mentioned in sections 146 and 148.
John Galt
The question "Who is John Galt?" is asked repeatedly throughout Atlas Shrugged. Late into the book we learn that '''John Galt''' is the man who stopped the motor of the world and the leader of the ''Strikers''. He is also the same character as the '''Mystery Worker'''.
The son of an Ohio garage mechanic, Galt left home at age 12 and began college at Patrick Henry University at age 16. There he befriended Francisco d'Anconia and Ragnar Danneskj ld, all three of whom double majored in physics and philosophy. They were the cherished students of the brilliant scientist Robert Stadler and the brilliant philosopher Hugh Akston.
After graduating, Galt became an engineer at the Twentieth Century Motor Works where he designed a revolutionary new motor powered by ambient static electricity with the potential to change the world. Like Ellis Wyatt, he has created what many had for years said was impossible. When the company owners decided to run the factory by the collectivist maxim, 'By each according to his ability, to each according to his need', Galt organized a successful labor strike, proclaiming his promise to stop the motor of the world. He began traversing the globe, meeting the world's most successful businessmen, systematically convincing them to follow in his footsteps one by one, they began abandoning their business empires (which, Galt convinced them, were doomed to failure anyhow, given the increased nationalization of industry by the government).
Secretly, these captains of industry, led by Galt and banker Midas Mulligan, had created their own society a secret enclave of rational individualists living in "Galt's Gulch", a town secluded high in a wilderness of mountains. Dagny accidentally finds the town and a shocked John Galt by crash landing a light aircraft while pursuing Quentin Daniels.
Since everyone across the country is repeating the phrase, "Who is John Galt?", it is natural that many people have attempted to answer that question. The phrase becomes an expression of helplessness and despair at the current state of the world. ''Dagny Taggart'' hears a number of John Galt Legends before finding the real John Galt and eventually joining his cause, and learning that all of the stories have an element of truth to them.
:''There is a clothing store in Vail, Colorado called John Galt Ltd. One presumes that, on occasion, a customer unknowingly walks in and asks, "Who is John Galt?"''
Lillian Rearden
The wildly unsupportive wife of ''Hank Rearden''. They have been married eight years as the novel begins.
Lillian is a frigid ''Moocher'' who seeks to destroy her husband. She compares being Rearden's wife with owning the world's most powerful horse. Since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast, she must bridle it down to her level, even if that means it will never reach its full potential and its power will be greviously wasted.
Lillian also serves to illustrate Rand's Theory of sex. She believes sex is a base animal instinct and that sexual indulgence is a sign of moral weakness. She is incapable of feeling this kind of desire, which she believes testifies to her moral superiority. However, according to the theory of sex Lillian's lack of sexual capacity results from her inability to experience value in herself she is therefore unable to respond sexually when she experiences value in others.
Lillian tolerates sex with her husband only because she is 'realistic' enough to know he is just a brute who requires satisfaction of his brute instincts. In section 161 she indicates that she abhors ''Francisco d'Anconia'', because she believes he is a sexual adventurer. Lillian Rearden appears in sections 121 and 161.
The Looters
A group of evil characters sometimes referred to as "James Taggart and his friends". They are similar to the Moochers. The Looters consist of men and women who use force to obtain value from those who produce it. They seek to destroy the producers despite the fact that they are dependent upon them. The Looters include: Mr. Thompson, Balph Eubank, Floyd Ferris, James Taggart, Orren Boyle, Paul Larkin, Robert Stadler, Simon Pritchett, Wesley Mouch, and Cuffy Miegs.
Midas Mulligan
A wealthy banker who mysteriously disappears in protest after he is given a court order to loan money to an incompetent loan applicant. Midas Mulligan is responsible for the creation and distribution of the money that is exclusively used in Galt's Gulch, and is the original owner of the land where Galt's Gulch is located. He is also responsible for the production of the money used there.
The Moochers
A group of characters, similar to the ''Looters'', who use guilt as a weapon against those who produce value. They seek to destroy the producers despite the fact that they are dependent upon them. The Moochers include ''Lillian Rearden'', ''Philip Rearden'', and Hank Rearden's ''mother''.
Mort Liddy
A hack composer who writes trite scores for movies and modern symphonies that no one listens to. He believes melody is a primitive vulgarity. He is one of ''Lillian Rearden's'' friends and a member of the cultural elite. Mort Liddy appears in section 161.
Mr. Mowen
The president of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company, Inc. of Connecticut. He is a businessman who sees nothing wrong with the moral code that is destroying society and would never dream of saying he is in business for any reason other than the good of society. He is unable to grapple with abstract issues, and is frightened of anything controversial. Dagny Taggart hires Mr. Mowen to produce switches made of Rearden Metal. He is reluctant to build anything with this unproven technology, and has to be ridden and cajoled before he is willing to accept the contract. When pressured by public opinion, he discontinues production of the switches, forcing Dagny to find an alternative source. Mr. Mowen appears in section 171.
Mystery Worker
A menial worker for Taggart Transcontinental who often dines with ''Eddie Willers'' in the employee's cafeteria. Eddie finds him very easy to talk to, and Mystery Worker not so subtly leads him on so that Eddie reveals important information about ''Dagny Taggart'' and Taggart Transcontinental. Eddie tells him which suppliers and contractors Dagny is most dependent on, and with remarkable consistency, those are the next men to disappear mysteriously. Mystery Worker is actually John Galt. Mystery Worker appears in section 133.
The unnamed newsstand owner
He works in the Taggart Terminal. Twenty years ago he owned a cigarette factory but it went under, and he's been working at his newsstand ever since. He is a collector of cigarettes, and knows every brand ever made. He occasionally chats with ''Dagny Taggart'' when she comes by. On one occasion, in section 132, after Dagny asks him about his collection, he bemoans the fact that there are no new brands and the old brands are all disappearing. He examines a cigarette given to Dagny by ''Hugh Akston'', but it is a new brand that he has never seen before. It carries the sign of the dollar. In his first appearance, the Newsstand Owner likens the fire of a cigarette to the fire of the mind. This alludes to the Greek myth of Prometheus, who gave mankind the gift of fire, allowing it to raise itself up and become civilized. In Atlas Shrugged, it is the mind of man that raises mankind. Thus the cigarettes become symbolic of the men of the mind. The disappearance of the old brands represents the disappearance of the men of the mind, and the Newsstand Owner's discovery of the new brand foreshadows Dagny's discovery of a new kind of men of the mind.
Orren Boyle
The head of Associated Steel and a friend of ''James Taggart''. He is one of the ''Looters''. He is an investor in the San Sebastian Mines. Orren Boyle appears or is mentioned in sections 111, 114, 131, 132, 144, and 152.
Owen Kellogg
Assistant to the Manager of the Taggart Terminal in New York. He catches ''Dagny Taggart's'' eye as one of the few competent men on staff. After seeing the sorry state of the Ohio Division she decides to make him to its new Superintendent. However, as soon as she returns to New York, Kellogg informs her that he is quitting his job. He admits that he loves his work, but that's not enough to keep him. He won't say why he is leaving or what he will do. Later, he is noticed working as transient labor by the unsuccessful unmotivated businessman ''Mr. Mowen''. Owen Kellog eventually reaches, and settles in Atlantis. Owen Kellogg appears in sections 112 and 114.
Paul Larkin
An unsuccessful, middle aged businessman, a friend of the Rearden family, and a member of the ''Looters''. In section 121 Larkin visits Philadelphia to warn ''Hank Rearden'' of possible trouble from Washington. In section 131 he meets with the other Looters to work out a plan to bring Rearden down. James Taggart knows he is friends with Hank Rearden and challenges his loyalty, and Larkin assures Taggart that he will go along with them. Paul Larkin appears in sections 121, 132, and 2A1.
Philip Rearden
The younger brother of ''Hank Rearden'', and a ''Moocher''. He lives in his brother's home in Philadelphia and is completely dependent on him. He believes that the source of his sustenance is evil and would love to see him destroyed. He has never had a career and spends his time perfunctorily working for various social groups.
He becomes resentful of his brother's charity. He then requests that he be granted a job from his brother because he should not have to be burdened by the feeling of inadequacy of not earning his own livelihood. When confronted by his brother on how this job should be a mutually beneficial arrangement, Philip shrugs the argument off as irrelevant and that the job should be entitled to him solely based on his need for money and the fact of familial ties. Philip Rearden appears in sections 121 and 161.
Quentin Daniels
An enterprising engineer hired by ''Dagny Taggart'' to reconstruct ''John Galt's'' motor. Partway through this process, Quentin withdraws his effort for the same reasons John Galt himself had. Dagny sets out to meet Quentin in hopes of convincing him to resume his work. John Galt narrowly gets to him first. Dagny's pursuit of Quentin leads her to "Galt's Gulch"
Ragnar Danneskj ld
One of the original ''Strikers''. He is now world famous as a pirate. Ragnar was from Norway, the son of a bishop and the scion of one of Norway's most ancient, noble families. He attended Patrick Henry University and became friends with ''John Galt'' and ''Francisco d'Anconia'', while studying under ''Hugh Akston'' and ''Robert Stadler''.
Ragnar seizes relief ships that are being sent from the United States to Europe. No one knows what he does with the goods he seizes. As the novel progresses, Ragnar begins, for the first time, to become active in American waters, and is even spotted in Delaware Bay. Reportedly, his ship is better than any available in the fleets of the world's navies.
When he became a pirate, he was disowned and excommunicated. There is a price on his head in Norway, Portugal, Turkey.
According to Ayn Rand (verbal report), his name is a tribute to Victor Hugo. In Hugo's first novel, ''Hans of Iceland'', the hero becomes the first of the Counts of Danneskj ld. His name may be a pun on 'Dane's Gold', although "skj ld" means shield, not gold. Ragnar Danneskj ld appears in section 161.
Rearden's mother
Named Gertrude, she is a ''Moocher'' who lives with her son ''Hank Rearden'' at his home in Philadelphia. She is involved in church based charity work, and berates Rearden whenever she can. She insults him by saying he was always selfish, even as a child. She dotes on her weak son ''Philip Rearden''. Rearden's mother appears in section 121.
Richard Halley
Dagny Taggart's favorite composer, who mysteriously disappeared after the evening of his greatest triumph. In section 141 we learn that Richard Halley spent years as a struggling and unappreciated composer. At age 24 his opera ''Phaethon'' was performed for the first time, to an audience who booed and heckled it. (It was based on the Greek myth in which Phaethon steals his father's chariot, and dies in an audacious attempt to drive the sun across the sky. Halley changed the story, though, into one of triumph, in which Phaethon succeeds.) For years Halley wrote in obscurity. After nineteen years, ''Phaethon'' was performed again, but this time it was received to the greatest ovation the opera house had ever heard. It appears his critics felt he had paid his dues long enough that he was at last worthy of their approval. The following day, Halley retired, sold the rights to his music, and disappeared. Richard Halley is mentioned in sections 112, 114, 133, and 141, and appears in section 152.
Dr. Robert Stadler
A former professor at Patrick Henry University, mentor to ''Francisco d'Anconia'', ''John Galt'' and ''Ragnar Danneskj ld''. He has since become a sell out, one who had great promise but squandered it for social approval, to the detriment of the free. He works at the State Science Institute where all his inventions are perverted for use by the military, including the instrument of his demise: ''Project X.''
Dr. Simon Pritchett
The prestigious head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University and is considered the leading philosopher of the age. He is also a ''Looter''. He is certainly representative of the philosophy of the age he is a crude reductionist who believes man is nothing but a collection of chemicals he believes there are no standards, that definitions are fluid, reason is a superstition, that it is futile to seek meaning in life, and that the duty of a philosopher is to show that nothing can be understood. He explains all this in his book ''The Metaphysical Contradictions of the Universe'', and at cocktail parties. Dr. Pritchett appears in section 161.
The Strikers
People of the mind who go on strike because they do not appreciate being exploited by ''the Looters'' and demonized by a society who depends on them for its very existence. The leader of the Strikers is ''John Galt''. Other Strikers include: Hugh Akston, Francisco d'Anconia, Ragnar Danneskj ld, Richard Halley, and the Brakeman. Characters who join the Strikers in the course of the book include: Dagny Taggart, Ellis Wyatt, Hank Rearden, Dick McNamara, and Owen Kellogg.
Mr. Thompson
The "Head of the State," which essentially means that he's the President of the United States, though he's never specifically referred to as such. In the world of ''Atlas Shrugged'' all Presidents and Prime Ministers are referred to simply as "Head of the State" and "Mr. ." This is because countries have been standardized as "People's States" which seem to share a common form of government. Thomspon's title can thus be seen as reflecting the fact that the US is in the process of evolving into one of these "People's States." One of the Looters, he's not particularly intelligent and has a very undistinguished look. He knows politics, however, and is a master of public relations and back room deals. Rand's notes indicate that she modelled him on President Harry S. Truman.
Wesley Mouch
A member of the ''Looters'' and, at the beginning of the storyline, the incompetent lobbyist whom ''Hank Rearden'' reluctantly employs in Washington. Initially Wesley Mouch is the least powerful and least significant of the Looters the other members of this group feel they can look down upon him with impunity. Eventually he becomes the most powerful Looter, and the country's economic dictator, thereby illustrating Rand's belief that a government run economy places too much power in the hands of incompetent bureaucrats who would never have positions of similar influence in a private sector business. Wesley Mouch appears in section 131 and is mentioned in section 161.
See also
Minor characters in Atlas Shrugged
Category:Atlas Shrugged
Atlas Shrugged characters
'''Technology in Atlas Shrugged''', Ayn Rand's novel includes a variety of technological products and devices. In addition to real world technology (aircraft, automobiles, diesel engines, phonograph records, radios, telephones, television, and traffic signals) Atlas Shrugged also includes various fictional technologies or fictional variants on real inventions.
Fictional technology
Fictional inventions mentioned in the book include refractor rays (Gulch mirage), Rearden Metal, a sonic death ray ("Project X"), voice activated door locks (Gulch power station), motors powered by static electricity, palm activated door locks (Galt's NY lab), shale oil drilling, and a nerve induction torture machine.
Traffic Signals
Early on, the book mentions the "screech" of a traffic signal as it changes. This implies the older technology of mechanical traffic signals, the kind which displayed a pennant or flag indicating stop or go, and the inverse indicator in the opposite direction. Traffic signals using lights have been around for over 40 years, so anything of this type is very old compared to today.
Project X
Project X is an invention of the scientists at the state science institute, requiring tons of Rearden Metal. Basically, it is a "death ray", and is capable of destroying anything. The scientists claim that the project will be used to preserve peace and squash rebellion. It is destroyed towards the end of the book, and emits a pulse of radiation that destroys everything in the surrounding area, including Cuffy Meigs and Dr. Stadler, as well as the Taggart Bridge.
Rearden Metal
Rearden metal is a fictitious metal alloy invented by Hank Rearden. It is lighter than traditional steel but stronger, and is to steel what steel was to iron. It is described as greenish blue. Among its ingredients are iron and copper.
Initially no one is willing to use Rearden metal because no one wants to stick his neck out and be the first to try it. Finally, Dagny Taggart places an order for Rearden Metal when she needs rails to rebuild the dying Rio Norte Line.
The first thing made from Rearden metal is a bracelet.
Rearden metal is mentioned in sections 114, 121, 131, 148 and 161.
Galt's Motor
John Galt invented a new type of electrical apparatus described in the book as a motor. However, it does not operate like a motor in the common use of the word today: it is capable of harnessing, transforming and applying energy in many ways other than mechanical. Galt's Motor was capable of jamming all radio receivers on Earth, and completely destroying the contents of Galt's booby trapped laboratory without causing collateral structural damage.
Though Rand describes it as turning static electricity into useful mechanical work, its operation is more reminiscent of modern speculation about zero point energy.
Dagny discovers a discarded prototype of the motor and it is superficially described in section Part 1, Chapter 9. Galt shows Dagny the motor and describes it in section Part 3, Chapter 1.
Category:Atlas Shrugged
Atlas Shrugged
'''Companies in Atlas Shrugged''', the Ayn Rand novel, generally, are divided into two groups, these that are operated by sympathetic characters are given the name of the owner, while companies operated by evil or incompetent characters are given generic names. In Atlas Shrugged men who give their names to their companies all become Strikers in due time.
Amalgamated Switch and Signal
A company run by Mr. Mowen and located in Connecticut. They have supplied Taggart Transcontinental for generations. Dagny Taggart orders Rearden Metal switches from them.
Amalgamated Switch and Signal appears in section 171.
Associated Steel
Associated Steel is the company owned by Orren Boyle. The company was started with just a few hundred thousand dollars of Boyle's own money, and hundreds of millions of dollars in government grants. Boyle used this money to buy out his competitors, and now relies on influence peddling and political favors to run his business.
Associated Steel is mentioned in sections 111, 114, 131 and 171.
Ayers Music Publishing Company
Ayers Music Publishing Company is the publisher of the music of Richard Halley. Dagny Taggart contacts Mr. Ayers to inquire as to the existence of Halley's Fifth Concerto.
Ayers Music Publishing Company is mentioned in section 114.
Barton and Jones
The company, located in Denver, that supplies food for the workers rebuilding the Rio Norte Line. They go bankrupt in the middle of the project.
Barton and James is mentioned in section 171.
d'Anconia Copper
A copper and mining company founded by Sebastian d'Anconia in Argentina during the time of the Inquisition. Each man who ran the company saw it grow by 10 in his lifetime, so by the time Francisco d'Anconia heads the company it is the largest in the world. His dream, from childhood, is to increase the size of the company by 100 .
d'Anconia Copper is mentioned in sections 152 and 171.
Hammond Motors
A car company in Colorado. They make the best cars on the market until the founder disappears.
Hank Rearden buys a Hammond on his trip to Colorado in section 171.
Incorporated Tool
A company that is contracted to deliver drill heads to Taggart Transcontinental but who fail to do this. It is mentioned in section 171.
Phoenix Durango
The Phoenix Durango is an old, small railroad located in the Southwest run by Dan Conway that has been insignificant for most of its existence. However, the Phoenix Durango grows rapidly when Ellis Wyatt revives the economy of Colorado and Taggart Transcontinental's Rio Norte Line fails to service Wyatt adequately. Later, James Taggart conspires to get the Phoenix Durango driven out of Colorado with the Anti dog eat dog Rule.
The Phoenix Durango is mentioned in sections 111, 114, 131 (alluded to), 132, 145, 146, 147 and 152.
Rearden Coal
A business founded by Hank Rearden prior to the founding of Rearden Steel. It is mentioned in section 121.
Rearden Limestone
A business founded by Hank Rearden prior to the founding of Rearden Steel. It is mentioned in section 121.
Rearden Ore
The first business founded by Hank Rearden. It is mentioned in section 121.
Rearden Steel
A company founded by Hank Rearden about ten years prior to the start of the story in the novel. Rearden bought an abandoned steel mill in Philadelphia at a time when all the experts thought that such a venture would be hopeless. He turned it into the most reliable and profitable steel company in the country.
As Dagny Taggart struggles to save Taggart Transcontinental, she becomes increasingly dependent on Rearden Steel.
Rearden Steel is mentioned in sections 111, 114, 121, 131 (alluded to), 161 and 162.
Summit Casting
A company in Illinois under contract to deliver rail spikes to Taggart Transcontinental. They go bankrupt before they can deliver, prompting Dagny Taggart to fly to Chicago and buy the company to get it started again.
Summit Casting is mentioned in section 171.
Taggart Transcontinental
The fictional railroad run by Dagny Taggart. Her commitment to the railroad creates one of the book's major conflicts.
Taggart Transcontinental was founded by Nathaniel Taggart who lived three generations (or so) prior to Dagny's generation. It was built without any grants, loans, or favors from the government, and was the last railroad that was still owned and controlled by its founder's descendants. Its motto is, ''From Ocean to Ocean''.
The 'flagship' of Taggart Transcontinental is the Taggart Comet which runs from New York to San Francisco, and which has never been late.
United Locomotive Works
An incompetent company that is supposed to deliver Diesel engines to Taggart Transcontinental. The order is delayed in perpetuity, and the president of the company refuses to ever give a straight answer as to why this is so.
The United Locomotive Works is mentioned in sections 133 and 141.
Wyatt Oil
The oil company run by Ellis Wyatt. Wyatt's father had squeezed a living out of the oil fields in Colorado, but when Ellis Wyatt took over the business took off. He discovered a technique for extracting oil from wells that had been abandoned as dried up. The success of Wyatt Oil that followed this discovery suddenly and unexpectedly turned Colorado into the leading economy in the country.
Wyatt Oil traditionally relied on Taggart Transcontinental's Rio Norte Line to ship its oil. But when that company could not grow fast enough to keep up with the booming Colorado economy, Wyatt started using the small but well managed Phoenix Durango instead. This prompted James Taggart to make deals with his friends to drive the Phoenix Durango out of Colorado. Afterwards, Dagny Taggart has to rebuild the Rio Norte Line so it can supply transportation to Wyatt Oil if she fails, the economy of Colorado, and of the whole country, could collapse.
Wyatt Oil is mentioned in sections 111, 132 and 171.
Category:Atlas Shrugged
Atlas Shrugged
Some of the important '''concepts''' discussed in Atlas Shrugged include the ''Sanction of the Victim'' and the ''Theory of Sex''.
Sanction of the Victim
The Sanction of the Victim is defined as "the willingness of the good to suffer at the hands of the evil, to accept the role of sacrificial victim for the 'sin' of creating values."
The entire story of Atlas Shrugged can be seen as an answer to the question, what would happen if this sanction was revoked? When Atlas shrugs, relieving himself of the burden of carrying the world, he is revoking his sanction.
The concept is supposedly original in the thinking of Ayn Rand and is foundational to her moral theory. She holds that evil is a parasite on the good and can only exist if the good tolerates it. To quote from Galt's Speech: "Evil is impotent and has no power but that which we let it extort from us", and, "I saw that evil was impotent...and the only weapon of its triumph was the willingness of the good to serve it." Morality requires that we do not sanction our own victimhood, Rand claims. In adhering to this concept, Rand assigns virtue to the trait of selfishness.
Throughout Atlas Shrugged, numerous characters admit that there is something wrong with the world but they cannot put their finger on what it is. The concept they cannot grasp is the sanction of the victim. The first person to grasp the concept is John Galt, who vows to stop the motor of the world by getting the creators of the world to withhold their sanction.
We first glimpse the concept in section 121 when Hank Rearden feels he is duty bound to support his family, despite their hostility towards him.
In section 146 the principle is stated explicitly by Dan Conway: "I suppose somebody's got to be sacrificed. If it turned out to be me, I have no right to complain."
Theory of Sex
In rejecting the traditional Christian altruist moral code, Rand also rejects the sexual code that, in her view, is a logical implication of altruism.
Rand introduces a theory of sex in ''Atlas Shrugged'' which is purportedly implied by her broader ethical and psychological theories. Far from being a debasing animal instinct, sex is the highest celebration of our greatest values. Sex is a physical response to intellectual and spiritual valuesa mechanism for giving concrete expression to values that could otherwise only be experienced in the abstract.
One is sexually attracted to those who embody one's values. Those who have base values will be attracted to baseness, to those who also have ignoble values. Those who lack any clear purpose will find sex devoid of meaning. People of high values will respond sexually to those who embody high values.
That our sexual desire is a response to the embodiment of our values in others is a radical and original theory. However, even those who are sympathetic to this theory have criticized it as being incomplete. For instance, since according to Rand the economy is also such an expression of values, and since it is always possible to encounter someone who embodies one's values more completely, this would seem to make family undesirable. (Indeed, Rand treats "family" as a sort of trap.) Furthermore, promiscuity, prostitution, and an endless round robin of "values driven" sexual relationships would become inevitable. From this viewpoint, one could say that Aldous Huxley portrayed the ideal sexual state: ''Brave New World'' features humans who are incapable of deviating from their caste oriented "values", which naturally include a code of sexual desirability.
Her sexual theory is illustrated in the contrasting relationships of Hank Rearden with Lillian Rearden and Dagny Taggart, and later with Dagny Taggart and John Galt.
Other important illustrations of this theory are found in:
Section 152 recounts Dagny's relationship with Francisco d'Anconia.
Section 161 recounts Hank and Lillian Rearden's courtship, and Lillian's attitude towards sex.
Category:Atlas Shrugged
This is a list of general items in Ayn Rand's ''Atlas Shrugged''.
Anti dog eat dog Rule
The Anti dog eat dog Rule is passed by the National Alliance of Railroads in section 145, allegedly to prevent "destructive competition" between railroads. The rule gives the Alliance the authority to forbid competition between railroads in certain parts of the country. It was crafted by Orren Boyle as a favor for James Taggart, with the purpose of driving the Phoenix Durango out of Colorado.
Bracelet
The very first thing made from ''Rearden Metal'' is a bracelet. The bracelet is used to illustrate Rand's Theory of Sex.
The bracelet symbolizes the value created by Hank Rearden's long struggle to invent Rearden Metal. When he gives it to Lillian Rearden as a present in section 121 she says, "It's fully as valuable as a piece of railroad rails." However, Lillian fully grasps the significance of the gift her snide remark is her way of denigrating her husband's ethos.
In section 161, Lillian wears this bracelet at a party thrown on her anniversary. She makes fun of it all night long, and when Dagny Taggart hears Lillian say she would gladly trade it for a common diamond bracelet, Dagny takes her up on it.
Lillian later asks for it back upon realizing her power over her husband was slowly diminishing. Dagny denies the offer.
The bracelet appears in sections 121 and 161.
Cub Club
A night club in New York. When Francisco d'Anconia returns to New York in section 141, he explains he came because of a hat check girl at the Cub Club and the liverwurst at Moe's Delicatessen on Third Avenue.
Equalization of Opportunity Bill
A bill designed by the Looters that proposes to limit the number of businesses any one person can own to one. It is aimed primarily at Hank Rearden, who uses Rearden Ore to guarantee Rearden Steel with a supply of iron ore. By passing this Bill, the Looters can seize Rearden's other businesses for themselves, and then deny him the iron he needs to run his steel mills.
The Looters claim the Bill is meant to give a chance to the little guy.
The Equalization of Opportunity Bill is appears in section 161.
Galt's Gulch
A secluded refuge in a valley of Colorado where the men of ability have retreated after relinquishing participation in American society. Nicknamed "Galt's Gulch" by its inhabitants, it is in fact the property of "Midas" Mulligan, one of the early strikers to follow John Galt's call. This call was to the great men of mind and action to abandon the increasingly slave state inclinations of a decaying United States to go on strike thereby withdrawing the only thing supporting the parasites and looters.
Sarcastically nicknamed Midas in the press because everything he seemed to touch turned to gold, Mulligan adopted the nickname during his explosive investment career before dropping out of sight. He had purchased this land among his far ranging speculative endeavors, and subsequently retreated to it upon his disappearance. Other strikers soon followed him there, including John Galt, renting or buying land for summer retreats as a respite from continuing their search for fellow strikers among the increasingly collapsing American society. Eventually, a society develops in Galt's Gulch as more people live there year round as the outside world becomes virtually unsafe to visit.
We are introduced to Galt's Gulch in the final section of the Novel, in the first chapter, entitled Atlantis. The people live with each other in completely free society and embody everything which is the thesis of the Novel, the appropriate values for a society of Mankind: philosophical, moral, economic, legal, aesthetic, and sexual, among others too numerous to mention.
We find industrious, ambitious, happy people continuing their chosen fields of endeavor without the yokes of any taxation or regulation. Conversely, there is a reverence for private property everything transacted is paid for with the re invented currency of solid gold coin struck from the reserves of Midas Mulligan's bank which now resides in the valley. The townspeople receive services from the various heroes we have met throughout the Novel, who all now reside and produce in the valley. They purchase power inexpensively from Galt and his invention of the static electricity motor, maintain their anonymity from the outside world via Galt's invention of the air wave reflection device (giving the view from above the camouflage of reflected images of other mountainsides nearby), and some attend Galt's lectures on Physics, where he explains his discoveries on new fundamental laws and applied mathematics. The people purchase medical treatment from the care of Dr. Hendricks, who uses his invention of a portable X ray machine to initially diagnose Dagny Taggart upon her crash landing into the valley, attend concerts of new musical compositions of Richard Halley who has continued to compose in the Valley, acquire raw materials from the efforts of Francisco D'Anconia's excavations around the valley, attend philosophy lectures from the now retired pirate Ragnar Danneskj ld, receive loans from Midas Mulligan, etc.
Rand's description of Galt's Gulch was inspired by a visit she and her husband Frank O'Connor took to Ouray, Colorado while researching Colorado for the novel.
Halley's Fifth Concerto
Richard Halley disappeared after he had written only four concertos. In section 112, Dagny Taggart, an enthusiastic fan of Halley's music, hears an unfamiliar theme being whistled by a brakeman on the Taggart Comet. She asks him what it is he responds Halley's Fifth Concerto. When Dagny says Halley only wrote four concertos, the brakeman says he made a mistake and denies knowing what the song was.
Later, Dagny calls Mr. Ayers to find out if Halley wrote a fifth concerto. Ayers says Halley did not.
Halley's Fifth Concerto is mentioned in sections 112, 114 and 152.
Halley's Fourth Concerto
The last thing Richard Halley wrote before he disappeared. It is a song of rebellion and defiance that seemed to say agony and suffering were not necessary. Dagny Taggart listened to this piece in section 141.
It is mentioned in section 152.
''Heaven's In Your Backyard''
A film. Mort Liddy wrote the score, using a bastardized version of ''Halley's Fourth Concerto''. It is mentioned in section 161.
John Galt Legends
Since everyone across the country is asking, "Who is John Galt?", it is not surprising that some people have come up with answers. A number of John Galt Legends are told, each of which, ironically, turns out to be true, at least symbolically.
'''''Legend 1''''' (section 161): A spinster at Lillian Rearden's party tells Dagny the story. John Galt was a man of inestimable wealth who found the sunken island of Atlantis while fighting the worst storm ever wreaked upon the world. The sight was so beautiful that, having seen it, he could never go back to the world, so he sank his ship and took his fortune down with him.
The actual John Galt was a man who created something of inestimable value, a new motor, and who discovered the secret to what was wrong with the world while fighting the most evil social philosophy ever put into practice. The world he envisioned was so beautiful that he refused to live in the world that was, and disappeared, taking the secret of motor with him.
Atlantis, the Isles of the Blessed, is a place where no one could enter except those who had the spirit of a hero. Described in these terms, it is the same as ''Galt's Gulch''.
Moe's Delicatessen
A delicatessen in New York. When Francisco d'Anconia returns to New York in section 141, he explains he came because of a hat check girl at the ''Cub Club'' and the liverwurst at Moe's Delicatessen on Third Avenue.
National Alliance of Railroads
An industry group formed to promote the welfare of the industry as a whole, requiring members to sacrifice their individual interests for the common good. Orren Boyle has friends on the National Alliance of Railroads, and he gets them to support the Anti dog eat dog Rule, which uses a string of pretenses to drive the Phoenix Durango out of Colorado.
The National Alliance of Railroads is mentioned in sections 131, 145 and 146.
National Council of Metal Industries
An industry group that uses political pull to get its way. James Taggart has friends on the National Council of Metal Industries, and he gets them to support legislation that will hurt Rearden Steel and help Associated Steel.
The National Council of Metal Industries is mentioned in section 131.
Patrick Henry University
The most prestigious university in the world. It was attended by John Galt, Francisco d'Anconia, and Ragnar Danneskjold, where they met and became friends. Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler taught there. It is located in Cleveland.
Rio Norte Line
A branch of Taggart Transcontinental that runs from Cheyenne, Wyoming to El Paso, Texas.
It is mentioned in sections 111, 114, 131 (alluded to), 132, 133, 141, 146, 147 and 148.
Rockdale Station
A station on the Taggart Transcontinental line, located five miles from the Taggart estate and overlooking the Hudson River. It was the site of Dagny Taggart's first job with the railroad, night operator, at age 16.
It appears in section 152.
San Sebastian
A community built to house the workers of the ''San Sebastian Mines'' and their families. As it turns out, the houses, roads, and everything of practical value is built so poorly that the community can be expected to fall apart within a year or two. Only the church was built to last.
It is mentioned in section 152.
San Sebastian Line
A branch of Taggart Transcontinental that serves the ''San Sebastian Mines'' in Mexico.
The mines were developed by Francisco d'Anconia and attracted significant investments from James Taggart and Orren Boyle, who assumed Francisco could be counted on to deliver a winner.
The San Sebastian Line is nationalized by the Mexican government soon after completion.
When it is nationalized in section 142, it is referred to as the San Sebastian Railroad.
It is mentioned in sections 114, 131, 132, 133, 142, 143 and 152.
San Sebastian Mines
San Sebastian Mines is a copper mining project in Mexico founded by Francisco d'Anconia and named after his ancestor Sebastian d'Anconia. Francisco's reputation as a businessman is so great that investors flock to him, begging to invest money in the enterprise. Investors include James Taggart and Orren Boyle. Taggart goes so far as to build a new branch of Taggart Transcontinental, the ''San Sebastian Line'', to serve the mines, sinking 30 million into the project. When the development of the mines appears complete, the Mexican government nationalizes them as well as the ''San Sebastian Line'', only to discover there is no copper and there never was.
When Taggart tells Francisco he considers the Mines a rotten swindle (section 161), Francisco explains that Taggart should be pleased with the way he ran the mines. He says he put into practice those moral precepts that were accepted around the world. The world says it is evil to pursue a profit he got no profit from the worthless mines. The world says the purpose of an enterprise is not to produce, but to give a livelihood to its employees it produced nothing, but created jobs that would never have existed if one was only concerned with developing a real mine. The world says the owner is an exploiter and the workers do all the real work he left the enterprise entirely in the hands of the workers and did not burden anyone with his presence. The world says need is more important than ability he hired a mining specialist who needed a job very badly, but had no ability.
In short, the San Sebastian Mines were an illustration of what happens when this moral code is put into practice, and a warning of what will soon happen to the world as a whole.
The San Sebastian Mines appear in sections 111, 131, 132, 142, 151, 152 and 161.
Taggart Building
A skyscraper in New York, the headquarters of Taggart Transcontinental, and the location of the Taggart Terminal.
Taggart Comet
The Taggart Comet is Taggart Transcontinental's flagship train. It runs from New York to San Francisco, and has never been late.
The Taggart Comet appears in sections 112, 113 and 152.
The Future
See Bertram Scudder.
''The Heart Is A Milkman''
''The Heart is a Milkman'' is a novel being written by Balph Eubank. It is about the central fact of human existence, frustration. Eubank says he will dedicate it to Lillian Rearden.
It is mentioned in section 161.
The Octopus
See Bertram Scudder.
''The Vulture Is Molting''
A best selling novel that captures the spirit of the times, ''The Vulture Is Molting'' is "A penetrating study of a businessman's greed. A fearless revelation of man's depravity." The book is mentioned in section 141 as one of the artifacts of popular culture that depresses Dagny Taggart with its baseness.
Wayne Falkland Hotel
A luxurious hotel in New York, it is considered the best hotel left in the world. It is where Francisco d'Anconia stays when he is in town. It was also the scene of Dagny Taggart's debut ball when she was seventeen.
It may be based on the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City.
The Wayne Falkland Hotel is mentioned in sections 141, 151 and 152.
Wyatt Oil Fields
The Wyatt Oil Fields are in Colorado. They are a bunch of old, abandoned oil wells that were revived by a new technique invented by Ellis Wyatt. This has almost single handedly revitalized the economy of Colorado.
The Wyatt Oil Fields appear in sections 111 and 161.
Category:Atlas Shrugged
Category:Lists of fictional things
Atlas
As told in ''Atlas Shrugged'', Atlas carried the world on his shoulders. But in the Greek Myths, the Titan Atlas stands on the earth and holds up the sky. In the statues that represent Atlas, the big round thing on his back represents the heavens, which, because of the apparent circular motion of the planets around the earth, were conceived of as being round. Some tellings of the Atlas myth have him carrying both the earth and the heavens on his back, but this appears to be a modern retelling further research might confirm this.
Character names
Some of the character names are, or appear to be, puns, or have some other significance. (See also Characters in Atlas Shrugged.)
When asked why so many of her names have syllables with many hard consonants like dag, tag, den, stad, Rand said that she just liked those sounds.
'''Ragnar Danneskjold''' sounds like 'Dane's Gold', a tribute paid by the medieval English to the Vikings to bribe them into being peaceful. (However, note "skjold" means shield, not gold.) However, the hero of Victor Hugo's first novel, ''Hans of Iceland'' becomes the first of the Counts of Danneskj ld. In the 1970's, Rand told Marsha Familaro Enright that her use of this name was not plagiarism because there really were Counts of Danneskj ld.
'''Robert Stadler''' sounds like the German word for state, Staat. Dr. Stadler is a statist, in that he believes it appropriate and necessary for the state to fund scientific research.
'''Francisco d'Anconia''' Rand's husband was Frank O'Connor.
'''John Galt''' the name of a 19th century Scottish novelist, though this is apparently coincidental. Galt is close to 'Geld' and 'gold'. The name was probably used because it had to be such that it could become proverbialthis would not be possible with a long, awkward name.
'''Wesley Mouch''' Mouch is exactly what his name sounds like, a mooch. He has no real virtue or skill, but somehow becomes a powerful figure.
Crime
Common street crime is conspicuously absent in ''Atlas Shrugged''. Characters walk the streets with no thought of being mugged or attacked.
Historical figures and events
''Atlas Shrugged'' takes place in a world with a different history from our own, but there are some historical figures and events that are mentioned.
Aristotle (section 152): Francisco d'Anconia wrote a thesis on the influence of Aristotle's theory of the Immovable Mover.
Dark Ages (section 161): Ragnar Danneskjold's piracy is likened to something out of the Dark Ages.
Inquisition (section 152): Sebastian d'Anconia flees Spain to escape persecution under the Inquisition.
Middle Ages (section 161): It is said that Ragnar Danneskjold hides in the Norwegian fjords as the Vikings did in the Middle Ages.
Nero (section 152): Francisco d'Anconia compares himself to the Emperor Nero.
Patrick Henry (section 152): The eponym of Patrick Henry University.
Vikings (section 161): It is said that Ragnar Danneskjold hides in the Norwegian fjords as the Vikings did in the Middle Ages.
Humor
In section 152, Francisco cracks that the Mexican government was promising a roast of pork every Sunday for every man, woman, child and abortion.
In section 152, Francisco lists the various buildings constructed for the workers of the San Sebastian Mines, and notes how they are all poorly built and can be expected to collapse, except for the church. "The church, I think, will stand. They'll need it," he quips. Since the other things are things of valuehouses, roads, etc.it is ironic that only the church was built to last to Rand and her heroes, a church is of no real value.
Almost every nation in the world except the United States is referred to as "The People's State of...", and they are all, apparently, the recipients of relief supplies from the United States. In conversation, people casually refer to them as "The People's State of..." rather than just, say, France or Norway. It is obvious that people would not refer to countries by their formal names in casual conversationwe don't call Canada "The Dominion of Canada" or Germany "The Federal Republic of Germany"so by having her characters do this Rand is exercising her dry wit.
Lying
The sympathetic characters of ''Atlas Shrugged'' generally do not tell lies. With the following exceptions, even when they are clearly trying to conceal something, they do not rely on overt falsehood, even when it is obvious that they could do so without being found out.
In section 112 Brakeman tells Dagny Taggart he does not recall the name of the song he was whistling or where he heard it.
In section 141 Francisco d'Anconia tells the press he came to New York because of a hat check girl and the liverwurst at Moe's Delicatessen.
In section 151 we learn Dagny Taggart once lied to her mother about a cut to her lip that Francisco had given her. This was the only lie she ever told.
In section 152 Dagny Taggart asks Francisco if Richard Halley has written a fifth concerto. He is evasive and tells her that Halley has stopped writing. Is this a lie?
In section 161, Hank Rearden tells Dagny that he was the one who invited Bertram Scudder to the Rearden's anniversary party. It was actually Lillian who invited him, and Rearden had been furious about it.
In part 2 chapter 9, Eddie Willers tells Dagny Taggart that his hesitation and uncertainty is caused by the illegality of her directions. In fact, Eddie was shocked by the evidence and thus realization of her affair with Hank Rearden.
People's States
Almost every nation that is mentioned, other than the United States, is referred to as a "People's State". These include:
The People's State of England
The People's State of France
The People's State of India
The People's State of Mexico
The People's State of Norway
The People's State of Portugal
The People's State of Turkey
The leaders of these countries are given the title the "Head of the People's State," and called "Mr. " (or "Senor" ). The President of the United States is refered to as "Mr. Thompson" and called the "Head of the State," which seems to imply the US is on its way to becoming a People's State as well.
Religion
In section 152 Francisco tells Dagny he named the San Sebastian Mines after his ancestor Sebastian d'Anconia, a man they both honor deeply. This, to Dagny, is blasphemythe only kind of blasphemy she understands.
Social classes
Rand is sometimes called an elitist. This claim is probably accurate if we allow for the fact that Rand had her own standard of elitenessthroughout ''Atlas Shrugged'', virtue is equated with creative ability. It is, however, worth noting that in ''Atlas Shrugged'', there are no characters with creative ability which do not function as author surrogate characters (most notably Dagny Taggart) conversely, all of the characters which disagree with the author are unintelligent and creatively bankrupt, and usually actively destructive. Compare to the real world, where scientists, inventors, artists and industrialists often have wildly varying and strongly conflicting desires and opinions.
Different social classes are represented among both the heroes and the villains of ''Atlas Shrugged''. Among the heroes, John Galt and Hank Rearden are from working class backgrounds, while Dagny Taggart and Francisco d'Anconia are from wealthy families. Among the villains, Fred Kinnan is from a working class background, while James Taggart and Betty Pope are from wealthy families.
Category:Atlas Shrugged
.
'''''Atlas Shrugged''''' is a novel by Russian born writer and philosopher Ayn Rand, first published in 1957 in the USA, and Rand's last work of fiction before concentrating her writings exclusively on philosophy. Most regard ''Atlas Shrugged'' as Rand's most famous work, her ''tour de force'', and most Objectivists hold it to be, objectively (as in factually), the greatest novel of all time. Its theme (as stated by Rand) is "the importance of the individual's reasoning mind in human life."
It is a highly philosophical and allegorical story that deals with themes of Rand's own Objectivism, though she was not yet known as a philosopher when it was written. Whether or not she had philosophical intentions, and to what extent or sense the novel is an allegory, are controversial subjects. In fact, the ideas behind the book, and their extremism, as well as its relative popularity have made it one of the most controversial novels of the 20th century. It is also one of the longest novels ever written, totaling one thousand pages or more (depending on the publication).
Philosophy and writing
The theme of ''Atlas Shrugged'' is that independent, rational thought is the motor that powers the world. In the book, "men of the mind" go on strike, allowing the collapse of what only they hold together a peaceful cohesiveness Rand claims that humans, particularly those whose productive work comes from mental effort, may create wherever forceful human interference is absent. Given no alternative, they remove themselves from the "looters." The title is an analogy: the rational men, like the Greek God Atlas, hold the world on their shoulders in the form of a strike, they have chosen to 'shrug.' The book is rooted in Objectivism, the philosophical system founded by Rand.
Rand suggests that society stagnates when independence and individual achievement are discouraged or demonized, and that, inversely, a society will become more prosperous as it allows, encourages, and rewards independence and individual achievement. Rand believed that independence flourishes to the extent that people are free, and that achievement is rewarded best when private property is respected strictly. She advocated laissez faire capitalism as the political system that is most consistent with these beliefs. These considerations make ''Atlas Shrugged'' a highly political book, especially in its portrayal of fascism, socialism and communism, or indeed any form of state intervention in societal affairs, as fatally flawed. However, Rand claimed that it is not a ''fundamentally'' political book, but that the politics portrayed in the novel are a result of her attempt to display her image of the ideal man and the position of the human mind in society.
Rand argues that independence and individual achievement drive the world, and should be embraced. Her worldview requires a "rational" moral code. She disputes the notion that self sacrifice is a virtue, and is similarly dismissive of human faith in a god or higher being. The book positions itself against Christianity specifically, often directly within the characters' dialogue.
Setting
Exactly when ''Atlas Shrugged'' is meant to take place is kept deliberately vague. In section 152, the population of New York City is given as 7 million. The historical New York City reached 7 million people in the 1930s, which might place the novel sometime after that. There are many early 20th century technologies available, but the political situation is clearly different from actual history. One interpretation is that the novel takes place a hundred (or perhaps ''hundreds'') of years in the future, implying that since the world lapsed into its socialistic morass, a global wide stagnation has occurred in technological growth, population growth, and indeed growth of ''any'' kind the wars, economic depressions, and other events of the 20th century would be a distant memory to all but scholars and academicians. This would be in line with Rand's ideas and commentary on other novels depicting utopian and dystopian societies. Furthermore, this is also in line with an excerpt from a 1964 interview with ''Playboy'' magazine in which Rand states "What we have today is not a capitalist society, but a mixed economy that is, a mixture of freedom and controls, which, by the presently dominant trend, is moving toward dictatorship. The action in ''Atlas Shrugged'' takes place at a time when society has reached the stage of dictatorship. When and if this happens, that will be the time to go on strike, but not until then.", thus implying that her novel takes place at some point in the future. The concept of societal stagnation in the wake of collectivist systems is central to the plot of another of Rand's works, ''Anthem''.
All countries outside the US have become, or become during the novel, "People's States". There are many examples of early 20th century technology in ''Atlas Shrugged'', but no post war advances such as nuclear weapons, helicopters, or computers. Jet planes are mentioned briefly as being a relatively new technology. Television is a novelty that has yet to assume any cultural significance, while radio broadcasts are prominent. Though Rand does not use in the book many of the technological innovations available while she was writing, she introduces some advanced, fictional inventions (e.g., sound based weapons of mass destruction, torture devices, as well as power plants).
Most of the action in ''Atlas Shrugged'' occurs in the United States. However, there are important events around the world, such as in the People's States of Mexico, Chile, and Argentina, and piracy at sea.
Plot
A section by section analysis of ''Atlas Shrugged'' is available on Wikibooks.
The novel s plot, split into three sections (though the story is coherent apart from these,) is extremely complex. The first two sections, and to some extent the last, follow Dagny Taggart, a no nonsense railroad executive, and her attempt to keep the company alive despite the fact that society is falling towards collectivism altruism statism. All throughout the novel people repeat a platitude Dagny greatly resents: Who is John Galt? It is a reflection of their helplessness, as the saying means Don t ask important questions, because they don t have answers.
The geniuses of the world seem to be disappearing, and the apparent decline of civilization is making it more and more difficult for her to sustain her life long aspirations of running the trans continental railroad, which has been in her family for several generations. She deals with other characters such as Hank Rearden, a self made businessman of great integrity whose career is hindered by his false feelings of obligation towards his wife. Francisco d'Anconia, Dagny s childhood friend, first love, and king of the copper industry, appears to have become a worthless playboy who is purposely destroying his business.
As the novel progresses: the myths about the real John Galt, as well as Francisco d'Anconia s actions, become more and more a reflection of the state of the culture, and seem to make more and more sense and, Hank and Dagny begin to experience the futility of their attempts to survive in a society that hates them and those like them for their greatness.
During their plight, Dagny and Hank find the remnants of a motor that turns atmospheric energy into kinetic energy, an astounding feat they also find evidence that the minds (the Atlases ) of the world are disappearing because of one particular destroyer taking them away. Dagny and Hank deal with the irrationalities and apparent contradictions of their atmosphere, and search for the creator of the motor as well as the destroyer who is draining the world of its prime movers, in an effort to secure their ability to live rational lives.
All of this leads to an elaborate action based explanation and eventual climax, presenting an understanding of all of the issues explored, and breaking everything down into one basic conflict. The final parts of the novel involve a speech by the story's true protagonist, and a resolution concerning the fate of society. The question 'Who is John Galt' is also answered.
Characters
Minor Characters
Companies
Concepts
Places
Technology
Things
Topics of note
Film adaptation
Rights to the novel ''Atlas Shrugged'' were purchased by the Baldwin Entertainment Group in 2003 with the intent of producing a feature length film. Company leader Howard Baldwin was quoted in September 2004 as saying "...everything is on track and the movie hasn t been held up one bit... I assure you that this will be a big movie and ''it will get made''." Two works of Rand's''The Fountainhead'' and ''We the Living''have been adapted into movies so far.
External links
http: www.aynrand.org
http: www.atlassociety.org news atlas movie updated050304.asp
http: www.cordair.com gaetano index.htm
References and further reading
Publications
''Atlas Shrugged'', Ayn Rand Signet (September 1996) ISBN 0451191145
''Atlas Shrugged (Cliffs Notes)'', Andrew Bernstein Cliffs Notes (June 5, 2000) ISBN 0764585568
''The World of Atlas Shrugged'', Robert Bidinotto The Objectivist Center HighBridge Company (April 19, 2001) ISBN 156511471X
''Atlas Shrugged: Manifesto of the Mind (Twayne's Masterwork Studies, No. 174)'' Mimi Reisel Gladstein Twayne Pub (June 2000) ISBN 0805716386
''The Moral Revolution in Atlas Shrugged'', Nathaniel Branden The Objectivist Center (July 1999) ISBN 1577240332
''Odysseus, Jesus, and Dagny'', Susan McCloskey The Objectivist Center (August 1, 1998) ISBN 1577240251
Foreign translations
German: ''Wer ist John Galt?'' (Hamburg, Germany: GEWIS Verlag), ISBN 3 932 56403 0.
Italian: ''La rivolta di Atlante'', 2 vol. (Milano, Garzanti, 1958), Out of print. Translator: Laura Grimaldi
Japanese: '' '' ( ), ISBN 4 8284 1149 6. Translator: .
Norwegian: ''De som beveger verden''. (Kagge Forlag, 2000), ISBN 8 248 90083 5 (hardcover), ISBN 8 248 90169 6 (paperback). Translator: John Erik B e Lindgren.
Polish: ''Atlas Zbuntowany'' (Zysk i S ka, 2004), ISBN 83 7150 969 3 (Twarda). Translator: Iwona Micha owska.
Spanish: ''La Rebelion de Atlas.'' (Editorial Grito Sagrado), ISBN 9 872 09510 8 (hardcover), ISBN 9 872 09511 6 (paperback).
Swedish: ''Och v rlden sk lvde.'' (, 2005), ISBN 9 175 66556 5. Translator: Maud Freccero.
Turkish: ''Atlas Vazge ti.'' (Plato Yaynlar, 2003), ISBN 9 759 67726 1. Translator: Belks orap .
Reviews
from a self proclaimed non Libertarian
from the Weird Bookshelf ("fine science fiction books").
Slade, Robert M. from the Internet Review Project (1998).
which, while attempting to address the environmentalist issues, claims that ''Atlas Shrugged'' is a sequel to ''The Lord of the Rings.''
and in depth Chapter by Chapter, Motif by Motif, etc. analysis.
Satires and parodies
within Robert Anton Wilson's Illuminatus! Trilogy (Search for "Taffy Rhinestone" in the former link to read the spoof.)
a thousand pages distilled into about a thousand words.
, a look at parallel universes wherein all of Ayn Rand's books are four hundred pages shorter
''Elvis Shrugged'', an early '90s comic book miniseries published by Revolutionary Comics in which popular entertainers Elvis Presley, a cyborg Frank Sinatra, Frank Zappa, Madonna, Spike Lee, and others take the place of various ''Atlas Shrugged'' counterparts.
, a depiction of the first film festival held in Galt's Gulch
, starring Bob the Angry Flower
Category:1957 books
Category:Atlas Shrugged
Category:Novels
Category:Philosophical novels
Category:Books critical of Christianity
Category:Books by Ayn Rand
de:Atlas wirft die Welt ab
es:La Rebelion de Atlas
he:
sv:Och v rlden sk lvde
zh:
'''Anthropology''' (from the Greek word '' '', "human" or "person") consists of the study of humanity (see genus ''Homo''). It is holistic in two senses: it is concerned with all humans at all times and with all dimensions of humanity. A primary trait that traditionally distinguished anthropology from other humanistic disciplines is an emphasis on cultural relativity, indepth examination of context, and cross cultural comparisons.
In North America, "anthropology" is traditionally divided into four sub disciplines:
physical anthropology or biological anthropology, which studies primate behavior, human evolution, osteology, forensics and population genetics
cultural anthropology, (called social anthropology in the United Kingdom and now often known as socio cultural anthropology). Areas studied by cultural anthropologists include social networks, diffusion, social behavior, kinship patterns, law, politics, ideology, religion, beliefs, patterns in production and consumption, exchange, socialization, gender, and other expressions of culture, with strong emphasis on the importance of fieldwork or participant observation (i.e living among the social group being studied for an extended period of time)
linguistic anthropology, which studies variation in language across time and space, the social uses of language, and the relationship between language and culture and
archaeology, that studies the material remains of human societies. Archaeology itself is normally treated as a separate (but related) field in the rest of the world, although closely related to the anthropological field of material culture, which deals with physical objects created or used within a living or past group as mediums of understanding its cultural values.
More recently, some anthropology programs began dividing the field into two, one emphasizing the humanities and critical theory, the other emphasizing the natural sciences and empirical observation.
Historical and institutional context
:''Main Article: History of anthropology''
The anthropologist T J Brewer once characterized anthropology as the most scientific of the humanities, and the most humanistic of the sciences. Understanding how anthropology developed contributes to understanding how it fits into other academic disciplines.
Contemporary anthropologists claim a number of earlier thinkers as their forebearers and the discipline has several sources. However, anthropology can best be understood as an outgrowth of the Age of Enlightenment. It was during this period that Europeans attempted systematically to study human behavior. Traditions of jurisprudence, history, philology and sociology developed during this time and informed the development of the social sciences of which anthropology was a part. At the same time, the romantic reaction to the Enlightenment produced thinkers such as Herder and later Wilhelm Dilthey whose work formed the basis for the culture concept which is central to the discipline.
Institutionally anthropology emerged from natural history (expounded by authors such as Buffon). This was the study of human beings typically people living in European colonies. Thus studying the language, culture, physiology, and artifacts of European colonies was more or less equivalent to studying the flora and fauna of those places. It was for this reason, for instance, that Lewis Henry Morgan could write monographs on both ''The League of the Iroquois'' and ''The American Beaver and His Works''. This is also why the material culture of 'civilized' nations such as China have historically been displayed in fine arts museums alongside European art while artifacts from Africa or Native North American cultures were displayed in Natural History Museums with dinosaur bones and nature dioramas. This being said, curatorial practice has changed dramatically in recent years, and it would be wrong to see anthropology as merely an extension of colonial rule and European chauvinism, since its relationship to imperialism was and is complex.
Anthropology grew increasingly distinct from natural history and by the end of the nineteenth century the discipline began to crystallize into its modern form by 1935, for example, it was possible for T.K. Penniman to write a history of the discipline entitled ''A Hundred Years of Anthropology''. Early anthropology was dominated by 'the comparative method'. It was assumed that all societies passed through a single evolutionary process from the most primitive to most advanced. Non European societies were thus seen as evolutionary 'living fossils' that could be studied in order to understand the European past. Scholars wrote histories of prehistoric migrations which were sometimes valuable but often also fanciful. It was during this time that Europeans first accurately traced Polynesian migrations across the Pacific Ocean for instance although some of them believed it originated in Egypt. Finally, the concept of race was actively discussed as a way to classify and rank human beings based on inherent biological difference.
In the twentieth century academic disciplines began to organize around three main domains. The "sciences" seeks to derive natural laws through reproducible and falsifiable experiments. The "humanities" reflected an attempt to study different national traditions, in the form of history and the arts, as an attempt to provide people in emerging nation states with a sense of coherence. The "social sciences" emerged at this time as an attempt to develop scientific methods to address social phenomena, in an attempt to provide a universal basis for social knowledge. Anthropology does not easily fit into one of these categories, and different branches of anthropology draw on one or more of these domains.
Drawing on the methods of the natural sciences as well as developing new techniques involving not only structured interviews but unstructured "participant observation" and drawing on the new theory of evolution through natural selection, they proposed the scientific study of a new object: "humankind," conceived of as a whole. Crucial to this study is the concept "culture," which anthropologists defined both as a universal capacity and propensity for social learning, thinking, and acting (which they see as a product of human evolution and something that distinguishes Homo sapiens and perhaps all species of genus ''Homo'' from other species), and as a particular adaptation to local conditions that takes the form of highly variable beliefs and practices. Thus, "culture" not only transcends the opposition between nature and nurture it transcends and absorbs the peculiarly European distinction between politics, religion, kinship, and the economy as autonomous domains. Anthropology thus transcends the divisions between the natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities to explore the biological, linguistic, material, and symbolic dimensions of humankind in all forms.
Anthropology in the U.S.
Anthropology in the United States was pioneered by staff of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Smithsonian Institution's Bureau of American Ethnology, such as John Wesley Powell and Frank Hamilton Cushing. Academic Anthropology was established by Franz Boas, who used his positions at Columbia University and the American Museum of Natural History to train and develop multiple generations of students. Boasian anthropology was politically active and suspicious of research dictated by the U.S. government or wealthy patrons. It was also rigorously empirical and skeptical of over generalizations and attempts to establish universal laws. Boas studied immigrant children in order to demonstrate that biological race was not immutable and that human conduct and behavior was the result of nurture rather than nature.
Drawing on his German roots, he argued that the world was full of distinct 'cultures' rather than societies whose evolution could be measured by how much or how little 'civilization' they had. Boas felt that each culture has to be studied in its particularity, and argued that cross cultural generalizations like those made in the natural sciences were not possible. In doing so Boas fought discrimination against immigrants, African Americans, and Native North Americans. Many American anthropologists adopted Boas' agenda for social reform, and theories of race continue to be popular targets for anthropologists today.
Boas's first generation of students included Alfred Kroeber, Robert Lowie, Edward Sapir and Ruth Benedict. All of these scholars produced richly detailed studies which described Native North America. In doing so they provided a wealth of details used to attack the theory of a single evolutionary process. Kroeber and Sapir's focus on Native American languages also helped establish linguistics as a truly general science and free it from its historical focus on Indo European languages.
The publication of Alfred Kroeber's textbook ''Anthropology'' marked a turning point in American anthropology. After three decades of amassing material the urge to generalize grew. This was most obvious in the 'Culture and Personality' studies carried out by younger Boasians such as Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict. Influenced by psychoanalytic psychologists such as Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, these authors sought to understand the way that individual personalities were shaped by the wider cultural and social forces in which they grew up. While such works as ''Coming of Age in Samoa'' and ''The Chrysanthemum and the Sword'' remain popular with the American public, Mead and Benedict never had the impact on the discipline of anthropology that some expected. Boas had planned for Ruth Benedict to succeed him as chair of Columbia's anthropology department, but she was sidelined by Ralph Linton and Mead was limited to her offices at the AMNH.
Anthropology in Britain
Whereas Boas picked his opponents to pieces through attention to detail, in Britain modern anthropology was formed by rejecting historical reconstruction in the name of a science of society that focused on analyzing how societies held together in the present.
The two most important names in this tradition were Alfred Reginald Radcliffe Brown and Bronislaw Malinowski, both of whom released seminal works in 1922. Radcliffe Brown's initial fieldwork in the Andaman Islands was carried out in the old style, but after reading mile Durkheim he published an account of his research (entitled simply ''The Andaman Islanders'') which drew heavily on the French sociologist. Over time he developed an approach known as structural functionalism, which focused on how institutions in societies worked to balance out or create an equilibrium in the social system to keep it functioning harmoniously. Malinowski, on the other hand, advocated an unhyphenated 'functionalism' which examined how society functioned to meet individual needs. Malinowski is best known not for his theory, however, but for his detailed ethnography and advances in methodology. His classic ''Argonauts of the Western Pacific'' advocated getting 'the native's point of view' and an approach to field work that became standard in the field.
Malinowski and Radcliffe Brown's success stem from the fact that they, like Boas, actively trained students and aggressively built up institutions which furthered their programmatic ambitions. This was particularly the case with Radcliffe Brown, who spread his agenda for 'Social Anthropology' by teaching at universities across the Commonwealth. From the late 1930s until the post war period a string of monographs and edited volumes appeared which cemented the paradigm of British Social Anthropology. Famous ethnographies include ''The Nuer'' by Edward Evan Evans Pritchard and ''The Dynamics of Clanship Among the Tallensi'' by Meyer Fortes, while well known edited volumes include ''African Systems of Kinship and Marriage'' and ''African Political Systems''.
Anthropology in France
Anthropology in France has a less clear genealogy than the British and American traditions. Most commentators consider Marcel Mauss to be the founder of the French anthropological tradition. Mauss was a member of Durkheim's Annee Sociologique group, and while Durkheim and others examined the state of modern societies, Mauss and his collaborators (such as Henri Hubert and Robert Hertz) drew on ethnography and philology to analyze societies which were not as 'differentiated' as European nation states. In particular, Mauss's ''Essay on the Gift'' was to prove of enduring relevance in anthropological studies of exchange and reciprocity.
Throughout the interwar years, French interest in anthropology often dovetailed with wider cultural movements such as surrealism and primitivism which drew on ethnography for inspiration. Marcel Griaule and Michel Leiris are examples of people who combined anthropology with the French avant garde. During this time most of what is known as ''ethnologie'' was restricted to museums, and anthropology had a close relationship with studies of folklore.
Above all, however, it was Claude L vi Strauss who helped institutionalize anthropology in France. In addition to the enormous influence his structuralism exerted across multiple disciplines, L vi Strauss established ties with American and British anthropologists. At the same time he established centers and laboratories within France to provide an institutional context within anthropology while training influential students such as Maurice Godelier and Francoise Heritier who would prove influential in the world of French anthropology. Much of the distinct character of France's anthropology today is a result of the fact that most anthropology is carried out in nationally funded research laboratories rather than academic departments in universities.
Anthropology after World War Two
Before WWII British 'social anthropology' and American 'cultural anthropology' were still distinct traditions. It was after the war that the two would blend to create a 'sociocultural' anthropology.
In the 1950s and mid 1960s anthropology tended increasingly to model itself after the natural sciences. Some, such as Lloyd Fallers and Clifford Geertz, focused on processes of modernization by which newly independent states could develop. Others, such as Julian Steward and Leslie White focused on how societies evolve and fit their ecological niche an approach popularized by Marvin Harris. Economic anthropology as influenced by Karl Polanyi and practiced by Marshall Sahlins and George Dalton focused on how traditional economics ignored cultural and social factors. In England, British Social Anthropology's paradigm began to fragment as Max Gluckman and Peter Worsley experimented with Marxism and authors such as Rodney Needham and Edmund Leach incorporated L vi Strauss's structuralism into their work.
Structuralism also influenced a number of development in 1960s and 1970s, including cognitive anthropology and componential analysis. Authors such as David Schneider, Clifford Geertz, and Marshall Sahlins developed a more fleshed out concept of culture as a web of meaning or signification, which proved very popular within and beyond the discipline. In keeping with the times, much of anthropology became politicized through the Algerian War of Independence and opposition to the Vietnam War Marxism became a more and more popular theoretical approach in the discipline. By the 1970s the authors of volumes such as ''Reinventing Anthropology'' worried about anthropology's relevance.
In the 1980s issues of power, such as those examined in Eric Wolf's ''Europe and the People Without History'' were central to the discipline. Books like ''Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter'' pondered anthropology's ties to colonial inequality, while the immense popularity of theorists such as Antonio Gramsci and Michel Foucault moved issues of power and hegemony into the spotlight. Gender and sexuality became a popular topic, as did the relationship between history and anthropology, influenced by Marshall Sahlins (again) who drew on L vi Strauss and Fernand Braudel to examine the relationship between social structure and individual agency.
In the late 1980s and 1990s authors such as George Marcus and James Clifford pondered ethnographic authority, particularly how and why anthropological knowledge was possible and authoritative. Ethnographies became more reflexive, explicitly addressing the author's methodology and cultural positioning, and its influence on their ethnographic analysis. This was part of a more general trend of postmodernism that was popular contemporaneously. Currently anthropologists have begun to pay attention to globalization, medicine and biotechnology, indigenous rights, and the anthropology of Europe.
Politics of anthropology
Anthropology's traditional involvement with nonwestern cultures has involved it in politics in many different ways.
Some political problems arise simply because anthropologists usually have more power than the people they study. Some have argued that the discipline is a form of colonialist theft in which the anthropologist gains power at the expense of subjects. The anthropologist, they argue, can gain yet more power by exploiting knowledge and artifacts of the people he studies while the people he studies gain nothing, or even lose, in the exchange. An example of this exploitative relationship can been seen in the collaboration in Africa prior to World War II of British anthropologists (such as Fortes) and colonial forces. More recently, there have been newfound concerns about bioprospecting, along with struggles for self representation for native peoples and the repatriation of indigenous remains and material culture.
Other political controversies come from American anthropology's emphasis on cultural relativism and its long standing antipathy to the concept of race. The development of sociobiology in the late 1960s was opposed by cultural anthropologists such as Marshall Sahlins, who argued that these positions were reductive. While authors such John Randal Baker continued to develop the biological concept of race into the 1970s, the rise of genetics has proven to be central to developments on this front. Recently, Kevin B. MacDonald criticized Boasian anthropology as part of a "Jewish strategy to facilitate mass immigration and to weaken the West" (The Culture of Critique,2002). As genetics continues to advance as a science some anthropologists such as Luca Cavalli Sforza have continued to transform and advance notions of race through the use of recent developments in genetics, such as tracing past migrations of peoples through their mitcochondial and Y chromosomal DNA, and ancestry informative markers.
Finally, anthropology has a history of entanglement with government intelligence agencies and anti war politics. Boas publicly objected to US participation in World War I and the collaboration of some anthropologists with US intelligence. In contrast, many of Boas' anthropologist contemporaries were active in the war effort in some form, including dozens who served in the Office of Strategic Services and the Office of War Information. In the 1950s, the American Anthropological Association provided the CIA information on the area specialities of its members, and a number of anthropologists participated in the U.S. government's Operation Camelot during the war in Vietnam. At the same time, many other anthropologists were active in the antiwar movement and passed resolutions in the American Anthropological Association (AAA) condemning anthropological involvement in covert operations. Anthropologists were also vocal in their opposition to the war in Iraq, although there was no consensus amongst practitioners of the discipline.
Professional anthropological bodies often object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state. Their codes of ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings. The British Association for Social Anthropology has called certain scholarships ethically dangerous. For example, the British Association for Social Anthropology has condemned the CIA's Pat Roberts Intelligence Scholars Program, which funds anthropology students at US universities in preparation for them to spy for the United States government. The AAA's current 'Statement of Professional Responsibility' clearly states that "in relation with their own government and with host governments... no secret research, no secret reports or debriefings of any kind should be agreed to or given."
Anthropology is the study of human diversity diversity of body and behavior, in the past and present. Anthropology consists of four subfields or subdisciplines:
'''Physical anthropology''' studies the diversity of the human body in the past and present. It includes how we acquired the structure of our body over time, that is human evolution, as well as differences and relationships between human populations today and their adaptations to their local environments. It also sometimes includes the evolution and diversity of our nearest relatives, the primates (apes and monkeys).
'''Cultural anthropology''' studies the diversity of human behavior in the present. This is what most anthropologists do and what most of the public sees when they look at "National Geographic" magazine or the "Discovery" channel on TV. Cultural anthropologists travel to foreign societies (although it is possible to do anthropology on your own society!), live among the people there, and try as much as they can to understand how those people live.
'''Archaeology''' studies the diversity of human behavior in the past. Since it studies how people lived in the past, these people are not available for us to visit and talk to...or at least, not people who are currently living in the same way that their ancestors did in the past. Therefore, archaeologists must depend on the artifacts and features that the people produced in the past and attempt to reconstruct their vanished way of life from the remnants of their culture.
'''Linguistic anthropology''' studies the diversity of human language in the past and present. While language is naturally a part of culture, it is such a huge topic that anthropologists have separated it into its own area of study. Linguistic anthropologists are concerned about the development of languages, perhaps even back to the first forms of language, and how language changes over time. They are also interested in how different contemporary languages differ today, how they are related, and how we can learn about things like migration and diffusion from that data. They also ask how language is related to and reflects on other aspects of culture.
Other sciences study humans too, of course. History, economics, psychology, sociology, even biology and chemistry can study humans. How is anthropology different?
The answer is the anthropological perspective, that is, the way that anthropology approaches the subject and thinks about or studies humans and their behavior. The anthropological perspective has three components:
(1) Cross cultural or comparative anthropology investigates humans in every form that they take. We are interested to see the entire spectrum of human bodies and behaviors, trying to learn the range of humanity all the ways that we can be human. By seeing humans in their every manifestation, and comparing those manifestations to each other, we can ask what is possible for humans and what is necessary for humans.
(2) Holistic anthropology tries to relate every part of culture to every other part. It understands that the various parts of culture are connected to each other and that certain combinations tend to occur or not to occur (for example, there are no hunting and gathering cultures that traditionally lived in cities...that's just impossible!). We are also interested in how a people's cultures is connected to their environment again, without high technology, you are not going to see farming or cities in the middle of the desert or the arctic.
(3) Relativistic this is the most profound yet controversial part of the anthropological perspective. Relativism means that the rules or norms or values of a culture are relative to that specific culture. In other words, say, monogamy may be normal or preferred in one culture, but polygamy may be normal or preferred in another. The point is that different cultures believe different things or value different things or even mean different things with perhaps identical looking behaviors or objects.
When you go to another culture, or even just interact with another culture (for example, when you are doing international business), you cannot assume that other people understand things the same way you do. In fact, you should assume that they don't! Anthropology counsels against hasty judgement of a new culture: aspects that a Western visitor may find strange or distasteful can be understood when situated within that culture's history and cosmology (understanding of the world). There will be a rationality for the phenomenon it may be 'rational', however, according to a cultural logic that conflicts with Western understandings. Malinowski's primacy of seeking to understand "the native point of view" remains fundamental to socio cultural anthropology today.
The point is that, if we want to understand other people properly, we must see what their behaviors or words or concepts mean to them, not what they would mean to us. Meaning is relative to the culture that creates that meaning. This is not to say that all things are true or even that all things are good cultural relativism does not necessarily entail moral relativism. Indeed, the American Anthropological Association's qualified support (1948 1997) for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as work by Sally Engle Merry, shows the latter is not a common anthropological point of view.
How does anthropology study culture?
One other way that anthropology is unique among the sciences that study humans is by its emphasis on 'fieldwork' You cannot get to know another culture just by reading about it or watching movies about it. At best, you could learn what other people have already discovered, but you could not learn anything new. So anthropology requires actually going to that society and living within their culture as much as possible. This is called participant observation. This depends crucially on finding (preferrably friendly) informants within the society, who will teach you their culture's rules of social behaviour, and include you in their activities. Then, as much as possible, you will try to eat their food, speak their language, and live their lives, often actually residing with a family in that society. It is not easy work, and it is not always fun, but there is no better way to learn.
Anthropological fields and subfields
Biological anthropology (also Physical anthropology)
Forensic anthropology
Paleoethnobotany
Cultural anthropology (also Social anthropology)
Anthropology of art
Applied anthropology
Cross Cultural Studies
Cyber anthropology
Development anthropology
Dual inheritance theory
Environmental anthropology
Economic anthropology
Ecological anthropology
Ethnography
Ethnomusicology
Feminist anthropology
Gender
Human behavioral ecology
Medical anthropology
Psychological anthropology
Political anthropology
Anthropology of religion
Public anthropology
Urban anthropology
Visual anthropology
Linguistic anthropology
Synchronic linguistics (or Descriptive linguistics)
Diachronic linguistics (or Historical linguistics)
Ethnolinguistics
Sociolinguistics
Archaeology
External links
the webpage of the largest professional organization of anthropologists in the world.
a book by John Randal Baker discussing the origins of racial classification and oppositions to the concept.
an article by David Price examining the relationship between American Anthropology and US intelligence services.
a BBC article on the program
(nearly) daily updated blog
Collection of anthropological texts
Collection of web resources about anthropology of cyberspace (in Italian)
A community orientated anthropology web portal with user run blogs, forums, tags, and a wiki.
See also
List of anthropologists
Important publications in anthropology
! What are our priorities for writing in this area? To help develop a list of the most basic topics in Anthropology, please refer to Anthropology basic topics.
Anthropology
Category:Mammalogy
Category:Behavioural sciences
af:Antropologie
an:Antropoloch a
ar:
ast:Antropolox a
bg:
bm:Anthropologie
bn:
bs:Antropologija
ca:Antropologia
co:Antropologia
cs:Antropologie
da:Antropologi
de:Anthropologie
el:
eo:Antropologio
es:Antropolog a
et:Antropoloogia
fa:
fi:Antropologia
fr:Anthropologie
fy:Antropology
gl:Antropolox a
he:
hi:
hr:Antropologija
hu:Antropol gia
ie:Antropologie
io:Antropologio
it:Antropologia
ja:
ko:
ku:Antropoloj
ky:
lt:Antropologija
lv:Antropolo ija
mk:
ms:Antropologi
nl:Antropologie
no:Antropologi
pl:Antropologia
pt:Antropologia
ro:Antropologie
ru:
sa:
scn:Antropoluggia
simple:Anthropology
sk:Antropol gia
sl:Antropologija
su:Antropologi
sv:Antropologi
ta:
th:
tl:Antropolohiya
tpi:Antropoloji
tr:Antropoloji
uk:
zh min nan:J n l i ha k
zh:
'''Archaeology''' or '''archeology''' (from the Greek words '' '' ancient and '' '' word speech discourse) is the study of human cultures through the recovery, documentation and analysis of material remains and environmental data, including architecture, artifacts, biofacts, human remains, and landscapes.
The goals of archaeology are to document and explain the origins and development of human culture, understand culture history, chronicle cultural evolution, and study human behavior and ecology, for both prehistoric and historic societies. It is considered to be one of the four sub fields of anthropology.
Usage
As with words such as encyclopedia and gynaecology, archaeology traditionally has an ''ae'' combination however, unlike other words, the ''ae'' is all but universally retained. Contrary to popular belief in other parts of the world, the spelling ''archeology'' is not predominant in United States dictionaries and would look quite odd to most Americans. Like the claim that ''theater'' refers to a building and ''theatre'' refers to the performing arts, the belief that ''archeology'' is an Americanism is little more than an urban myth. The traditional spelling, ''archaeology'', continues to be used in everyday writing throughout the world, including the U.S., even more so than theatre (the alternate spelling of which, while considered acceptable, is preferred less often than not).
Ontology and definition
In the Old World, archaeology has tended to focus on the study of physical remains, the methods used in recovering them and the theoretical and philosophical underpinnings in achieving the subject's goals. The discipline's roots in antiquarianism and the study of Latin and Ancient Greek provided it with a natural affinity with the field of history. In the New World, archaeology is more commonly devoted to the study of human societies and is treated as one of the four subfields of Anthropology. The other subfields of anthropology supplement the findings of archaeology in a holistic manner. These subfields are cultural anthropology, which studies behavioural, symbolic, and material dimensions of culture linguistics, which studies language, including the origins of language and language groups and physical anthropology, which includes the study of human evolution and physical and genetic characteristics. Other disciplines also supplement archaeology, such as paleontology, paleozoology, paleoethnobotany, paleobotany, geography, geology, art history, and classics.
Archaeology has been described as a craft that enlists the sciences to illuminate the humanities. Writing in 1948, the American archaeologist Walter Taylor asserted that "Archaeology is neither history nor anthropology. As an autonomous discipline, it consists of a method and a set of specialised techniques for the gathering, or 'production' of cultural information".
Archaeology is an approach to understanding human culture through its material remains regardless of chronology. In England, archaeologists have uncovered the long lost layouts of medieval villages abandoned after the crises of the 14th century and the equally lost layouts of 17th century parterre gardens swept away by a change in fashion. In downtown New York City archaeologists have exhumed the 18th century remains of the Black burial ground. Traditional Archaeology is viewed as the study of pre historical human cultures that is cultures that existed before the development of writing for that culture. Historical archaeology is the study of post writing cultures.
In the study of relatively recent cultures, which have been observed and studied by Western scholars, archaeology is closely allied with ethnography. This is the case in large parts of North America, Oceania, Siberia, and other places where the study of archaeology mingles with the living traditions of the cultures being studied. Kennewick Man is an example of archaeology interacting with modern culture. In the study of cultures that were literate or had literate neighbours, history and archaeology supplement one another for broader understanding of the complete cultural context, as at Hadrian's Wall.
Importance and applicability
Most of human history is not described by any written records. Writing did not exist anywhere in the world until about 5000 years ago, and only spread among a relatively small number of technologically advanced civilisations. In contrast ''Homo sapiens'' have existed for at least 200,000 years, and other species of ''Homo'' for millions of years (see Human evolution). These civilisations are, not coincidentally, the best known they have been open to the inquiry of historians for centuries, while the study of pre historic cultures has arisen only recently. Even within a civilisation that is literate at some levels, many important human practices are not officially recorded. Any knowledge of the formative early years of human civilisation the development of agriculture, cult practices of folk religion, the rise of the first cities must come from archaeology.
Even where written records do exist, they are invariably incomplete or biased to some extent. In many societies, literacy was restricted to the elite classes, such as the clergy or the bureaucracy of court or temple. The literacy even of an aristocracy has sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts. The interests and world view of elites are often quite different from the lives and interests of the rest of the populace. Writings that were produced by people more representative of the general population were unlikely to find their way into libraries and be preserved there for posterity. Thus, written records tend to reflect the biases of the literate classes, and cannot be trusted as a sole source. The material record is nearer to a fair representation of society, though it is subject to its own inaccuracies, such as sampling bias and differential preservation.
In addition to their scientific importance, archaeological remains sometimes have political significance to descendants of the people who produced them, monetary value to collectors, or simply strong aesthetic appeal. Many people identify archaeology with the recovery of such aesthetic, religious, political, or economic treasures rather than with the reconstruction of past societies.
This view is often espoused in works of popular fiction, such as ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'', ''The Mummy'', and ''King Solomon's Mines''. When such unrealistic subjects are treated more seriously, accusations of pseudoscience are invariably levelled at their proponents (see Pseudoarchaeology, below). However, these endeavours, real and fictional, are not representative of the modern state of archaeology.
Goals
There is still a tremendous emphasis in the practice of archaeology on field techniques and methodologies. These include the tasks of surveying areas in order to find new sites, digging sites in order to unearth the cultural remains therein, and classification and preservation techniques in order to analyse and keep these remains. Every phase of this process can be a source of information.
The goals of archaeology are not always the same. There are at least three broad, distinct theories of exactly what archaeological research should do. (These are beyond the scope of the present discussion, and are discussed at length below.) Nevertheless, there is much common ground.
Academic sub disciplines
''Main article: Archaeological sub disciplines''
As with most academic disciplines, there are a very large number of archaeological sub disciplines characterised by a specific method or type of material (e.g. lithic analysis, music, archaeobotany), geographical or chronological focus (e.g. Near Eastern archaeology, Medieval archaeology), other thematic concern (e.g. landscape archaeology), or a specific archaeological culture or civilisation (e.g. Egyptology).
Cultural resources management
''Cultural resources management'' (CRM) (also called ''heritage management'' in Britain) is a branch of archaeology that accounts for most research done in the United States and much of that in western Europe as well. In the United States, CRM archaeology has been a growing concern since the passage of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and most of the archaeology done in that country today proceeds from either direct or related requirements of that measure. In the United States, the vast majority of taxpayers, scholars, and politicians believe that CRM has helped to preserve much of that nation's history and prehistory that would have otherwise been lost in the expansion of cities, dams, and highways. Along with other statutes, this mandates that no construction project on public land or involving public funds may damage an unstudied archaeological site.
The application of CRM in the United Kingdom is not limited to government funded projects. Since 1990 PPG 16 has required planners to consider archaeology as a material consideration in determining applications for new development. As a result, numerous archaeological organisations undertake mitigation work in advance of (or during) construction work in archaeologically sensitive areas, at the developer's expense.
Among the goals of CRM are the identification, preservation, and maintenance of cultural sites on public and private lands, and the removal of culturally valuable materials from areas where they would otherwise be destroyed by human activity, such as proposed construction. This study involves at least a cursory examination to determine whether or not any significant archaeological sites are present in the area affected by the proposed construction. If these do exist, time and money must be allotted for their excavation. If initial survey and or test excavation indicates the presence of an extraordinarily valuable site, the construction may be prohibited entirely. CRM is a thriving entity, especially in the United States and Europe where archaeologists from private companies and all levels of government engage in the practice of their discipline.
Cultural resources management has, however, been criticized. CRM is conducted by private companies that bid for projects by submitting proposals outlining the work to be done and an expected budget. It is not unheard of for the agency responsible for the construction to simply choose the proposal that asks for the least funding. CRM archaeologists face considerable time pressure, often being forced to complete their work in a fraction of the time that might be allotted for a purely scholarly endeavour.
Field methods
Survey
A modern archaeological project often begins with a survey. ''Regional survey'' is the attempt to systematically locate previously unknown sites in a region. ''Site survey'' is the attempt to systematically locate features of interest, such as houses and middens, within a site. Each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods.
Survey was not widely practiced in the early days of archaeology. Cultural historians and prior researchers were usually content with discovering the locations of monumental sites from the local populace, and excavating only the plainly visible features there. Gordon Willey pioneered the technique of regional settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru, and survey of all levels became prominent with the rise of processual archaeology some years later.
Survey work has many benefits if performed as a preliminary exercise to, or even in place of, excavation. It requires relatively little time and expense, because it does not require processing large volumes of soil to search out artefacts. (Nevertheless, surveying a large region or site can be expensive, so archaeologists often employ sampling methods.) It avoids ethical issues (of particular concern to descendant peoples) associated with destroying a site through excavation. It is the only way to gather some forms of information, such as settlement patterns and settlement structure. Survey data are commonly assembled into maps, which may show surface features and or artefact distribution.
The simplest survey technique is ''surface survey''. It involves combing an area, usually on foot but sometimes with the use of mechanised transport, to search for features or artefacts visible on the surface. Surface survey cannot detect sites or features that are completely buried under earth, or overgrown with vegetation. Surface survey may also include mini excavation techniques such as augers, corers, and shovel test pits.
''Aerial survey'' is conducted using cameras attached to aircraft, balloons, or even kites. A bird's eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites. Aerial imaging can also detect many things not visible from the surface. Plants growing above a stone structure, such as a wall, will develop more slowly, while those above other types of features (such as middens) may develop more rapidly. Photographs of ripening grain, which changes colour rapidly at maturation, have revealed buried structures with great precision. Aerial survey also employs infrared, ground penetrating radar wavelengths, and thermography.
''Geophysical survey'' is the most effective way to see beneath the ground. Magnetometers detect minute deviations in the Earth's magnetic field caused by iron artefacts, kilns, some types of stone structures, and even ditches and middens. Devices that measure the electrical resistivity of the soil are also widely used. Most soils are moist below the surface, which gives them a relatively low resistivity. Features such as hard packed floors or concentrations of stone have a higher resistivity.
Although some archaeologists consider the use of metal detectors to be tantamount to treasure hunting, others deem them an effective tool in archaeological surveying. Examples of formal archaeological use of metal detectors include musketball distribution analysis on English Civil War battlefields, metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a nineteenth century ship wreck, and service cable location during evaluation. Metal detectorists have also contributed to the archaeological record where they have made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts from their archaeological context. In the UK, metal detectorists have been solicited for involvement in the Portable Antiquities Scheme.
Regional survey in maritime archaeology uses side scan sonar.
Excavation
Archaeological excavation existed even when the field was still the domain of amateurs, and it remains the source of the majority of data recovered in most field projects. It can reveal several types of information usually not accessible to survey, such as stratigraphy, three dimensional structure, and verifiably primary context.
Modern excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and features, known as their provenance or provenience, be recorded. This always involves determining their horizontal locations, and sometimes vertical position as well (also see Primary Laws of Archaeology). Similarly, their association, or relationship with nearby objects and features, needs to be recorded for later analysis. This allows the archaeologist to deduce what artefacts and features were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity. For example, excavation of a site reveals its stratigraphy if a site was occupied by a succession of distinct cultures, artefacts from more recent cultures will lie above those from more ancient cultures.
Excavation is the most expensive phase of archaeological research. Also, as a destructive process, it carries ethical concerns. As a result, very few sites are excavated in their entirety. Sampling is even more important in excavation than in survey. It is common for large mechanical equipment, such as backhoes (JCBs), to be used in excavation, especially to remove the topsoil (overburden), though this method is increasingly used with great caution. Following this rather dramatic step, the exposed area is usually hand cleaned with trowels or hoes to ensure that all features are apparent.
The next task is to form a site plan and then use it to help decide the method of excavation. Features dug into the natural subsoil are normally excavated in portions in order to produce a visible archaeological section for recording. Scaled plans and sections of individual features are all drawn on site, black and white and colour photographs of them are taken, and recording sheets are filled in describing the context of each. All this information serves as a permanent record of the now destroyed archaeology and is used in describing and interpreting the site.
Post excavation analysis
Once artefacts and structures have been excavated, or collected from surface surveys, it is necessary to properly study them, to gain as much data as possible. This process is known as post excavation analysis, and is normally the most time consuming part of the archaeological investigation. It is not uncommon for the final excavation reports on major sites to take years to be published.
At its most basic, the artefacts found are cleaned, catalogued and compared to published collections, in order to classify them typologically and to identify other sites with similar artefact assemblages. However, a much more comprehensive range of analytical techniques are available through archaeological science, meaning that artefacts can be dated and their compositions examined. The bones, plants and pollen collected from a site can all be analysed (using the techniques of zooarchaeology, paleoethnobotany, and palynology), while any texts can usually be deciphered.
These techniques frequently provide information that would not otherwise be known and therefore contribute greatly to the understanding of a site.
History of archaeology
''Main article: History of archaeology''
The history of archaeology has been one of increasing professionalisation, and the use of an increasing range of techniques, to obtain as much data on the site being examined as possible.
Excavations of ancient monuments and the collection of antiquities have been taking place for thousands of years, but these were mostly for the extraction of valuable or aesthetically pleasing artefacts.
It was only in the 19th century that the systematic study of the past through its physical remains began to be carried out. Archaeological methods were developed by both interested amateurs and professionals, including Augustus Pitt Rivers and William Flinders Petrie.
This process was continued in the 20th century by such people as Mortimer Wheeler, whose highly disciplined approach to excavation greatly improved the quality of evidence that could be obtained.
During the 20th century, the development of urban archaeology and then rescue archaeology have been important factors, as has the development of archaeological science, which has greatly increased the amount of data that it is possible to obtain.
Archaeological theory
''Main article: Archaeological theory''
There is no single theory of archaeology, and even definitions are disputed. Until the mid 20th century and the introduction of technology, there was a general consensus that archaeology was closely related to both history and anthropology. The first major phase in the history of archaeological theory is commonly referred to as '''cultural, or culture, history''', which was developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
In the 1960s, a number of young, primarily American archaeologists, such as Lewis Binford, rebelled against the paradigms of cultural history. They proposed a "New Archaeology", which would be more "scientific" and "anthropological", with hypothesis testing and the scientific method very important parts of what became known as '''processual archaeology'''.
In the 1980s, a new movement arose led by the British archaeologists Michael Shanks, Christopher Tilley, Daniel Miller, and Ian Hodder. It questioned processualism's appeals to science and impartiality and emphasised the importance of relativism, becoming known as '''post processual archaeology'''. However, this approach has been criticised by processualists as lacking scientific rigour. The validity of both processualism and post procuessualism is still under debate.
Archaeological theory now borrows from a wide range of influences, including neo Darwinian evolutionary thought, phenomenology, postmodernism, agency theory, cognitive science, Functionalism, gender based and Feminist archaeology, and Systems theory.
Public archaeology
Early archaeology was largely an attempt to uncover spectacular artifacts and features, or to explore vast and mysterious abandoned cities. Such pursuits continue to fascinate the public, portrayed in books (such as ''King Solomon's Mines'') and films (such as ''The Mummy'' and ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'').
Much thorough and productive research has indeed been conducted in dramatic locales such as Cop n and the Valley of the Kings, but the stuff of modern archaeology is not so reliably sensational. In addition, archaeological adventure stories tend to ignore the painstaking work involved in modern survey, excavation, and data processing techniques. Some archaeologists refer to such portrayals as "pseudoarchaeology".
Nevertheless, archaeology has profited from its portrayal in the mainstream media. Many practitioners point to the childhood excitement of Indiana Jones films and Tomb Raider games as the inspiration for them to enter the field. Archaeologists are also very much reliant on public support, the question of exactly who they are doing their work for is often discussed. Without a strong public interest in the subject, often sparked by significant finds and celebrity archaeologists, it would be a great deal harder for archaeologists to gain the political and financial support they require.
In the UK, popular archaeology programmes such as ''Time Team'' and ''Meet the Ancestors'' have resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest. Where possible, archaeologists now make more provision for public involvement and outreach in larger projects than they once did. However, the move towards being more professional has meant that volunteer places are now relegated to unskilled labour, and even this is less freely available than before. Developer funded excavation necessitates a well trained staff that can work quickly and accurately, observing the necessary health and safety and indemnity insurance issues involved in working on a modern building site with tight deadlines. Certain charities and local government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of academic work or as a defined community project. There is also a flourishing industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological holiday tours.
Archaeologists prize local knowledge and often liaise with local historical and archaeological societies. Anyone looking to get involved in the field without having to pay to do so should contact a local group.
Pseudoarchaeology
''Main article: Pseudoarchaeology''.
Pseudoarchaeology is an umbrella term for all activities that claim to be archaeological but in fact violate commonly accepted archaeological practices. It includes much fictional archaeological work (discussed above), as well as some actual activity. Many non fiction authors have ignored the scientific methods of processual archaeology, or the specific critiques of it contained in Post processualism.
An example of this type is the writing of Erich von D niken. His ''Chariots of the Gods'' (1968), together with many subsequent lesser known works, expounds a theory of ancient contacts between human civilisation on Earth and more technologically advanced extraterrestrial civilisations. This theory, known as palaeocontact theory, is not exclusively D niken's nor did the idea originate with him. Works of this nature are usually marked by the renunciation of well established theories on the basis of limited evidence, and the interpretation of evidence with a preconceived theory in mind.
Looting
Looting of archaeological sites by people in search of hoards of buried treasure is an ancient problem. For instance, many of the tombs of the Egyptian pharaohs were looted in antiquity. The advent of archaeology has made ancient sites objects of great scientific and public interest, but it has also attracted unwelcome attention to the works of past peoples. A brisk commercial demand for artefacts encourages looting and the illicit antiquities trade, which smuggles items abroad to private collectors. Looters damage the integrity of a historic site, deny archaeologists valuable information that would be learnt from excavation, and are often deemed to be robbing local people of their heritage.
The popular consciousness often associates looting with poor Third World countries. Many are former homes to many well known ancient civilizations but lack the financial resources or political will to protect even the most significant sites. Certainly, the high prices that intact objects can command relative to a poor farmer's income make looting a tempting financial proposition for some local people. However, looting has taken its toll in places as rich and populous as the United States and Western Europe as well. Abandoned towns of the ancient Sinagua people of Arizona, clearly visible in the desert landscape, have been destroyed in large numbers by treasure hunters. Sites in more densely populated areas farther east have also been looted. Where looting is proscribed by law it takes place under cover of night, with the metal detector a common instrument used to identify profitable places to dig.
Public outreach
Motivated by a desire to halt '''looting''', curb '''pseudoarchaeology''', and to secure greater public funding and appreciation for their work, archaeologists are mounting '''public outreach campaigns'''. They seek to stop looting by informing prospective artefact collectors of the provenance of these goods, and by alerting people who live near archaeological sites of the threat of looting and the danger that it poses to science and their own heritage. Common methods of public outreach include press releases and the encouragement of school field trips to sites under excavation.
The final audience for archaeologists' work is the public and it is increasingly realised that their work is ultimately being done to benefit and inform them. The putative social benefits of local heritage awareness are also being promoted with initiatives to increase civic and individual pride through projects such as community excavation projects and better interpretation and presentation of existing sites.
Descendant peoples
In the United States, examples such as the case of Kennewick Man have illustrated the tensions between Native Americans and archaeologists which can be summarised as a conflict between a need to remain respectful towards burials sacred sites and the academic benefit from studying them. For years, American archaeologists dug on Indian burial grounds and other places considered sacred, removing artefacts and human remains to storage facilities for further study. In some cases human remains were not even thoroughly studied but instead archived rather than reburied. Furthermore, Western archaeologists' views of the past often differ from those of tribal peoples. The West views time as linear for many natives, it is cyclic. From a Western perspective, the past is long gone from a native perspective, disturbing the past can have dire consequences in the present. To an archaeologist, the past is long gone and must be reconstructed through its material remains to indigenous peoples, it is often still alive.
As a consequence of this, American Indians attempted to prevent archaeological excavation of sites inhabited by their ancestors, while American archaeologists believed that the advancement of scientific knowledge was a valid reason to continue their studies. This contradictory situation was addressed by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 1990), which sought to reach a compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human remains. Due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism, some archaeologists have begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be descended from those under study.
Archaeologists have also been obliged to re examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples believe to constitute sacred space. To many native peoples, natural features such as lakes, mountains or even individual trees have cultural significance. Australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to survey these sites in order to give them some protection from being developed. Such work requires close links and trust between archaeologists and the people they are trying to help and at the same time study.
While this cooperation presents a new set of challenges and hurdles to fieldwork, it has benefits for all parties involved. Tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred, while the archaeologists gain the elders' aid in interpreting their finds. There have also been active efforts to recruit aboriginal peoples directly into the archaeological profession.
Repatriation
A new trend in the heated controversy between First Nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native artifacts to the original descendants. An example of this occurred June 21, 2005, when a community members and elders from a number of the 10 Algonquian nations in the Ottawa area convened on the Kitigan Zibi reservation in Kanawagi, Quebec, to inter ancestral human remains and burial goods some dating back 6,000 years.
The ceremony marked the end of a journey spanning thousands of years and many miles. The remains and artifacts, including beads, tools and weapons, were originally excavated from various sites in the Ottawa Valley, including Morrison and the Allumette Islands. They had been part of the Canadian Museum of Civilization s research collection for decades, some since the late 1800s. Elders from various Algonquin communities conferred on an appropriate reburial, eventually deciding on traditional redcedar and birchbark boxes lined with redcedar chips, muskrat and beaver pelts.
Now, an inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where close to 90 boxes of various sizes are buried. Although negotiations were at times tense between the Kitigan Zibi community and museum, they were able to reach agreement (source: ).
See also
List of significant archaeological discoveries
List of archaeological sites sorted by country
List of archaeologists
Biblical archaeology
List of archaeological periods
Prehistory
External links
The Alphabetical of Archaeology. French Archaeology.
Current News and Information pertaining to all areas of archaeology, plus free news feeds for webmasters.
is an academic journal specialising in Northeast Asian and North American archaeology.
Archaeological work and volunteer pages.
Anthropology Resources on the Internet : a web directory, part of the WWW Virtual Library, with over 4000 links grouped in specialised topics.
published by the Archaeological Institute of America
Directory of archaeological topics on the web.
Information about looting in Iraq.
, an essay at the Galilean Library on the philosophical underpinnning of archaeology and the debate over the New Archaeology.
The african archaeology portal, part of the WWW Virtual Library : all the web sites relating to african archaeology are listed here.
Further reading
Ashmore, W. and Sharer, R. J., ''Discovering Our Past: A Brief Introduction to Archaeology'' Mountain View: Mayfield Publishing Company. ISBN 076741196X. This has also been used as a source.
Neumann, Thomas W. and Robert M. Sanford, ''Practicing Archaeology: A Training Manual for Cultural Resources Archaeology'' , August, 2001, hardcover, 450 pages, ISBN 0759100942
Renfrew, Colin Bahn, Paul G., ''Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practice'', Thames and Hudson, 4th edition, 2004. ISBN 0500284415
Sanford, Robert M. and Thomas W. Neumann, ''Cultural Resources Archaeology: An Introduction'', , December, 2001, trade paperback, 256 pages, ISBN 0759100950
Trigger, Bruce. 1990. "A History of Archaeological Thought". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521338182
Category:Anthropology
Category:Archaeology
Category:Humanities occupations
Category:Social sciences
af:Argeologie
als:Arch ologie
ar:
an:Arquioloch a
bg:
bn:
bs:Arheologija
ca:Arqueologia
ceb:Arkeyolohiya
cs:Archeologie
cy:Archaeoleg
da:Ark ologi
de:Arch ologie
et:Arheoloogia
el:
es:Arqueolog a
eo:Arkeologio
eu:Arkeologia
fa:
fr:Arch ologie
fur:Archeologjie
gl:Arqueolox a
ko:
hr:Arheologija
io:Arkeologio
id:Arkeologi
ia:Archeologia
is:Fornleifafr i
it:Archeologia
he:
ka:
csb:Arche logij
ky:
sw:Akiolojia
lad:Arkeolojiya
la:Archaeologia
lv:Arheolo ija
lt:Archeologija
lb:Archeologie
li:Archeologie
hu:R g szet
mk:
ms:Arkeologi
nl:Archeologie
ja:
no:Arkeologi
nn:Arkeologi
pl:Archeologia
pt:Arqueologia
ro:Arheologie
ru:
sco:Airchaeologie
sq:Arkeologjia
scn:Archiolugg a
simple:Archaeology
sk:Archeol gia
sl:Arheologija
sr:
su:Ark ologi
fi:Arkeologia
sv:Arkeologi
tl:Arkeolohiya
ta:
th:
vi:Kh o c h c
tr:Kaz bilim
uk:
vo:V notav
zh:
'''Agricultural science''' is a broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic, and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. (Veterinary science, but not animal science, is often excluded from the definition.)
Agriculture and agricultural science
The two terms are often confused. However, they cover different concepts:
:Agriculture is the set of activities that transform the environment for the production of animals and plants for human use. Agriculture concerns techniques, including the application of agronomic research.
:Agronomy is research and development related to studying and improving plant based agriculture.
Agricultural sciences include research and development on:
Production techniques (e.g., irrigation management, recommended nitrogen inputs)
Improving production in terms of quantity and quality (e.g., selection of drought resistant crops and animals, development of new pesticides, yield sensing technologies, simulation models of crop growth, in vitro cell culture techniques)
Transformation of primary products into end consumer products (e.g., production, preservation, and packaging of dairy products)
Prevention and correction of adverse environmental effects (e.g., soil degradation, waste management, bioremediation)
Theoretical production ecology, relating to crop production modeling
traditional agricultural systems such as which serve to feed most people in the world and which often retain integration with nature in a way that hs proven more sustainable than modern systems
Food production and demand on a global basis, with special attention paid to the major producers of China and India.
Agricultural science: a local science
With the exception of theoretical agronomy, research in agronomy, more than in any other field, is strongly related to local areas. It can be considered a science of ecoregions, because it is closely linked to soil properties and climate, which are never exactly the same from one place to another. Many people think an agricultural production system relying on local weather, soil characteristics, and specific crops has to be studied locally. Others feel a need to know and understand production systems in as many areas as possible, and the human dimension of interation with nature.
History of agricultural science
''Main Article: History of agricultural science''
Agricultural science is seen by some to have began with Mendel's insightful genetc work, but in modern terms might be better dated from the chemical fertilizer outputs of plant physiological understanding in eighteenth century Germany. Today it is very different from what it was even in 1950. Intensification of agriculture since the 1960s in developed and developing countries, often referred to as the Green Revolution, was closely tied to progress made in selecting and improving crops and animals for high productivity, as well as to developing additional inputs such as artificial fertilizers and phytosanitary products.
As the oldest and largest human intervention in nature, the environmental impact of agriculture in general and more recently intensive agriculture, industrial development, and population growth have raised many questions among agricultural scientists and have led to the development and emergence of new fields. These include technological fields that assume the solution to technological problems lies in better technology, such as integrated pest management, waste treatment technologies, landscape architecture, genomics, and agricultural philosophy fields that include references to food production as something essentially different from non essential eeconomic 'goods'. In fact, the interaction between these two approaches provide a fertile field for deeper understanding in agricultural science.
New technologies, such as biotechnology and computer science (for data processing and storage), and technological advances have made it possible to develop new research fields, including genetic engineering, agrophysics, improved statistical analysis, and precision farming. Balancing these, as above, are the natural and human sciences of agricultural science that seek to understand the human nature interactions of traditional agriculture, including interaction of religion and agriculture, and the non material components of agricultural production systems.
Prominent agricultural scientists
Norman Borlaug
Luther Burbank
Louis Pasteur
Gregor Mendel
Ren Dumont
George Washington Carver
Agricultural science and agriculture crisis
Agriculture sciences seek to feed the world's population while preventing biosafety problems that may affect human health and the environment. This requires promoting good management of natural resources and respect for the environment, and increasingly concern for the psychological wellbeing of all concerned in the food production and consumption system.
Economic, environmental, and social aspects of agriculture sciences are subjects of ongoing debate. Recent crises (such as Avian Flu, mad cow disease and issues such as the use of genetically modified organisms) illustrate the complexity and importance of this debate.
Fields of agricultural science
Agricultural engineering
Agricultural philosophy
Biosystems engineering
Aquaculture
Agronomy and Horticulture
Agrophysics
Animal science
Plant fertilization, animal and human nutrition
Plant protection and animal health
Soil science, especially edaphology.
water science
Biotechnology, genetic engineering, and microbiology
Farming equipment
Irrigation and water management
Agricultural economics
Food science
Environmental science and engineering
Waste management
Ecology and environment
Theoretical production ecology
See also
Agricultural sciences basic topics
Agrology
Agronomy
History of agricultural science
Category:Agriculture
Category:Soil science
bg:
da:Agronomi
de:Agrarwissenschaft
fr:Agronomie
id:Agronomi
it:Agronomia
he:
nl:Landbouwkunde
ja:
pl:Agronomia
fi:Maataloustiede
sv:Agronomi
th:
zh:
'''Alchemy''' is an early protoscientific and philosophical discipline combining elements of chemistry, metallurgy, physics, medicine, astrology, semiotics, mysticism, spiritualism, and art. Alchemy has been practiced in ancient Egypt, India, and China, in Classical Greece and Rome, in the Islamic empire, and then in Europe up to the 19th century in a complex network of schools and philosophical systems spanning at least 2500 years.
Western alchemy has always been closely connected with Hermeticism, a philosophical and spiritual system that traces its roots to Hermes Trismegistus, a syncretic Egyptian Greek deity and legendary alchemist. These two disciplines influenced the birth of Rosicrucianism, an important esoteric movement of the 17th century. In the 19th century, as mainstream alchemy evolved into modern chemistry, its mystic and Hermetic aspects became the focus of a modern spiritual alchemy, where material manipulations are viewed as mere symbols of spiritual transformations.
The alchemists did not follow what is now known as the scientific method, and much of the "knowledge" they produced was later found to be banal, limited, wrong, or meaningless. Today, the discipline is of interest mainly to historians of science and philosophy, and for its mystic, esoteric, and artistic aspects. Nevertheless, alchemy was one of the main precursors of modern sciences, and we owe to the ancient alchemists the discovery of many substances and processes that are the mainstay of modern chemical and metallurgical industries.
Overview
.
Alchemy as a proto science
The common perception of alchemists is that they were pseudo scientists, crackpots and charlatans, who attempted to turn lead into gold, believed that the universe was composed of the four elements of earth, air, fire, and water, and spent most of their time concocting miraculous remedies, poisons, and magic potions.
This picture is rather unfair. Although many alchemists were indeed crackpots and charlatans, many were well meaning and intelligent scholars, who were simply struggling to make sense of a subject which, as we now know, was far beyond the reach of their tools. These people were basically "proto scientists", who attempted to explore and investigate the nature of chemical substances and processes. They had to rely on unsystematic experimentation, traditional know how, rules of thumb, and plenty of speculative thought to fill in the wide gaps in existing knowledge.
Given these conditions, the mystic character of alchemy is quite understandable: to the early alchemist, chemical transformations could only seem like magical phenomena governed by incomprehensible laws, whose potential and limitations he had no way of knowing. Having discovered that a specific procedure could turn an earth like ore into glistening metal, it was only natural to speculate that some different procedure could turn a metal into another.
At the same time, it was clear to the alchemists that "something" was generally being conserved in chemical processes, even in the most dramatic changes of physical state and appearance i.e. that substances contained some "principles" that could be hidden under many outer forms, and revealed by proper manipulation. Throughout the history of the discipline, alchemists struggled very hard to understand the nature of these principles, and find some order and sense in the results of their chemical experiments which were often undermined by impure or poorly characterized reagents, the lack of quantitative measurements, and confusing and inconsistent nomenclature.
In spite of those difficulties, and of many false turns and loops, the alchemists managed to make steady progress in the understanding of the natural world. To them we owe the discovery of many important substances and chemical processes, which paved the way for the modern science of chemistry, and are still the mainstay of today's chemical and metallurgical industries.
Alchemy as a philosophical and spiritual discipline
The best known goals of the alchemists were the transmutation of common metals into gold or silver, and the creation of a "panacea", a remedy that supposedly would cure all diseases and prolong life indefinitely. Starting with the Middle Ages, European alchemists invested much effort on the search for the "philosopher's stone", a mythical substance that was believed to be an essential ingredient for either or both of those goals. Alchemists enjoyed prestige and support through the centuries, though not for their pursuit of those unattainable goals, nor the mystic and philosophical speculation that dominates their literature. Rather it was for their mundane contributions to the "chemical" industries of the day ore testing and refining, metalworking, production of ink, dyes, paints, and cosmetics, leather tanning, ceramics and glass manufacture, preparation of extracts and liquors, and so on. (It seems that the preparation of ''aqua vitae'', the "water of life", was a fairly popular "experiment" among European alchemists.)
On the other hand, alchemists never had the intellectual tools nor the motivation to separate the physical (chemical) aspects of their craft from the metaphysical interpretations. Indeed, from antiquity until well into the Modern Age, a physics devoid of metaphysical insight would have been as unsatisfying as a metaphysics devoid of physical manifestation. For one thing, the lack of common words for chemical concepts and processes, as well as the need for secrecy, led alchemists to borrow the terms and symbols of biblical and pagan mythology, astrology, kabbalah, and other mystic and esoteric fields so that even the plainest chemical recipe ended up reading like an abstruse magic incantation. Moreover, alchemists sought in those fields the theoretical frameworks into which they could fit their growing collection of disjointed experimental facts.
Starting with the middle ages, some alchemists increasingly came to view these metaphysical aspects as the true foundation of alchemy and chemical substances, physical states, and material processes as mere metaphors for spiritual entities, states and transformations. Thus, both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the universal panacea symbolized evolution from an imperfect, diseased, corruptible and ephemeral state towards a perfect, healthy, incorruptible and everlasting state and the philosopher's stone then represented some mystic key that would make this evolution possible. Applied to the alchemist himself, the twin goal symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment, and the stone represented some hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal. In texts that are written according to this view, the cryptic alchemical symbols, diagrams, and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain multiple layers of meanings, allegories, and references to other equally cryptic works and must be laborously "decoded" in order to discover their true meaning.
Some humanistic scholars now see these spiritual and metaphysical allegories as the truest and most valuable aspect of alchemy, and even claim that the development of chemistry out of alchemy was a "corruption" of the original Hermetic tradition. This is the view espoused by contemporary practitioners of spiritual alchemy. Most scientists, on the other hand, tend to take quite the opposite view: to them, the path from the material side of alchemy to modern chemistry was the "straight road" in the evolution of the discipline, while the metaphysically oriented brand of alchemy was a "wrong turn" that led to nowhere. In either view, however, the na ve interpretations of some practitoners or the fraudulent hopes fostered by others should not diminish the contribution of the more sincere alchemists.
Alchemy and astrology
Since its earliest times, alchemy has been closely connected to astrology which, in Islam and Europe, generally meant the traditional Babylonian Greek school of astrology. Alchemical systems often postulated that each of the seven planets known to the ancients "ruled" or was associated with a certain metal. See the separate article on astrology and alchemy for further details.
Alchemy in the age of science
Up to the 18th century, alchemy was actually considered serious science in Europe for instance, Isaac Newton devoted considerably more of his time and writing to the study of alchemy than he did to either optics or physics, for which he is famous, (see Isaac Newton's occult studies). Other eminent alchemists of the Western world are Roger Bacon, Saint Thomas Aquinas, Tycho Brahe, Thomas Browne, and Parmigianino. The decline of alchemy began in the 18th century with the birth of modern chemistry, which provided a more precise and reliable framework for matter transmutations and medicine, within a new grand design of the universe based on rational materialism.
In the first half of the nineteenth century, one established chemist, Baron Carl Reichenbach, researched on concepts similar to the old alchemy, such as the Odic force, but his research did not enter the mainstream of scientific discussion.
Matter transmutation, the old goal of alchemy, enjoyed a moment in the sun in the 20th century when physicists were able to convert lead atoms into gold atoms via a nuclear reaction. However, the new gold atoms, being unstable isotopes, lasted for under five seconds before they broke apart. More recently, reports of table top element transmutation by means of electrolysis or sonic cavitation were the pivot of the cold fusion controversy of 1989. None of those claims have yet been reliably duplicated.
Alchemical symbolism has been occasionally used in the 20th century by psychologists and philosophers. Carl Jung reexamined alchemical symbolism and theory and began to show the inner meaning of alchemical work as a spiritual path. Alchemical philosophy, symbols and methods have enjoyed something of a renaissance in post modern contexts, such as the New Age movement. Even some physicists have played with alchemical ideas in books such as ''The Tao of Physics'' and ''The Dancing Wu Li Masters''.
Alchemy as a subject of historical research
The history of alchemy has become a vigorous academic field. As the obscure''hermetic'', of courselanguage of the alchemists is gradually being "deciphered", historians are becoming more aware of the intellectual connections between that discipline and other facets of Western cultural history, such as the sociology and psychology of the intellectual communities, kabbalism, spiritualism, Rosicrucianism, and other mystic movements, cryptography, witchcraftand, of course, the evolution of science and philosophy.
Etymology
The word ''alchemy'' comes from the Arabic ''al kmiya'' or ''al khmiya'' ( or ), which might be formed from the article ''al '' and the Greek word ''chumeia'' ( ) meaning "cast together", "pour together", "weld", "alloy", etc. (from ''khumatos'', "that which is poured out, an ingot", or from Persian ''Kimia'' meaning "gold." A decree of Diocletian, written about 300 CE in Greek, speaks against "the ancient writings of the Egyptians, which treat of the ''khmia'' transmutation of gold and silver".
It has been suggested that the Arabic word ''al kmiya'' actually means "the Egyptian science ", borrowing from the Coptic word for "Egypt", ''kme'' (or its equivalent in the Mediaeval Bohairic dialect of Coptic, ''khme''). The Coptic word derives from Demotic ''km'', itself from ancient Egyptian ''kmt''. The ancient Egyptian word referred to both the country and the colour "black" (Egypt was the "Black Land", by contrast with the "Red Land", the surrounding desert) so this etymology could also explain the nickname "Egyptian black arts". However, this theory may be just an example of folk etymology.
History
at the time.
Alchemy encompasses several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents. These traditions' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and "genetic" relationships.
One can distinguish at least two major strands, which appear to be largely independent, at least in their earlier stages: Chinese alchemy, centered in China and its zone of cultural influence and Western alchemy, whose center has shifted over the millennia between Egypt, Greece and Rome, the Islamic world, and finally back to Europe. Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoism, whereas Western alchemy developed its own philosophical system, with only superficial connections to the major Western religions. It is still an open question whether these two strands share a common origin, or to what extent they influenced each other.
Alchemy in Ancient Egypt
The origin of western alchemy may generally be traced to ancient (pharaonic) Egypt. Metallurgy and mysticism were inexorably tied together in the ancient world, as the transformation of drab ore into shining metal must have seemed to be an act of magic governed by mysterious rules. It is claimed therefore that Alchemy in ancient Egypt was the domain of the priestly class.
Egyptian alchemy is known mostly through the writings of ancient (Hellenic) Greek philosophers, which in turn have often survived only in Islamic translations. Practically no original Egyptian documents on alchemy have survived. Those writings, if they existed, were likely lost when the emperor Diocletian ordered the burning of alchemical books after suppressing a revolt in Alexandria (292), which had been a center of Egyptian alchemy.
Nevertheless archaeological expeditions in recent times have unearthed evidence of chemical analysis during the Naqada periods. For example, a copper tool dating to the Naqada era bears evidence of having been used in such a way (reference: artifact 5437 on display at although it possibly was discovered haphazardly.
Other evidence indicates early alchemists in ancient Egypt had invented mortar by 4000 BC and glass by 1500 BC. The chemical reaction involved in the production of Calcium Oxide is one of the oldest known (references: Calcium Oxide, limekiln):
:CaCOsub3 sub heat CaO COsub2 sub.
Ancient Egypt additionally produced cosmetics, cement, faience and also pitch for shipbuilding. Papyrus had also been invented by 3000 BC.
Legend has it that the founder of Egyptian alchemy was the god Thoth, called Hermes Thoth or Thrice Great Hermes (''Hermes Trismegistus'') by the Greek. According to legend, he wrote what were called the forty two Books of Knowledge, covering all fields of knowledge including alchemy. Hermes's symbol was the caduceus or serpent staff, which became one of many of alchemy's principal symbols. The "Emerald Tablet" or ''Hermetica'' of Thrice Great Hermes, which is known only through Greek and Arabic translations, is generally understood to form the basis for Western alchemical philosophy and practice, called the hermetic philosophy by its early practitioners.
The first point of the "Emerald Tablet" tells the purpose of hermetical science: "in truth certainly and without doubt, whatever is below is like that which is above, and whatever is above is like that which is below, to accomplish the miracles of one thing." This is the macrocosm microcosm belief central to the hermetic philosophy. In other words, the human body (the microcosm) is affected by the exterior world (the macrocosm), which includes the heavens through astrology, and the earth through the elements.
It has been speculated that a riddle from the Emerald Tablet "it was carried in the womb by the wind" refers to the distillation of oxygen from saltpeter a process that was unknown in Europe until its (re)discovery by Sendivogius in the 17th century.
In the 4th century BC, the Greek speaking Macedonians conquered Egypt and founded the city of Alexandria in 332. This brought them into contact with Egyptian ideas. See Alchemy in the Greek World below.
Chinese alchemy
Whereas Western alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of base metals into noble ones, Chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to medicine. The philosopher's stone of European alchemists can be compared to the Grand Elixir of Immortality sought by Chinese alchemists. However, in the hermetic view, these two goals were not unconnected, and the philosopher's stone was often equated with the universal panacea therefore, the two traditions may have had more in common than it initially appears.
Black powder may have been an important invention of Chinese alchemists. Described in 9th century texts and used in fireworks by the 10th Century, it was used in cannons by 1290. From China, the use of gunpowder spread to Japan, the Mongols, the Arab world and Europe. Gunpowder was used by the Mongols against the Hungarians in 1241, and in Europe starting with the 14th century.
Black powder was most likely invented in the middle east before it found its way
to China. Saltpeter, the critical oxidising component, was found naturally in India and
along the Salt trade routes in the Middle East.
Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoist forms of medicine, such as Acupuncture and Moxibustion, and to martial arts such as Tai Chi Chuan and Kung Fu (although some Tai Chi schools believe that their art derives from the Hygienic or Philosophical branches of Taoism, not the Alchemical).
Indian alchemy
Little is known in the West about the character and history of Indian alchemy. An 11th century Persian alchemist named al Biruni reported that they "have a science similar to alchemy which is quite peculiar to them, which is called Rasav tam. It means the art which is restricted to certain operations, drugs, compounds, and medicines, most of which are taken from plants. Its principles restored the health of those who were ill beyond hope and gave back youth to fading old age." The best example of a text based on this science is ''The Vaishashik Darshana'' of Kanada (fl. 600 BC), who described an atomic theory over a century before Democritus.
The texts of Ayurvedic Medicine and Science have aspects related to alchemy, such having cures for all known diseases. The similarities in Ayurveda and alchemy are that both had methods used to treat people by putting oils over them.
Some people have also noted certain similarities between the metaphysics of the Samkhya philosophical tradition of Hinduism and the metaphysics of alchemy. Whether there is any direct connection between the two systems is an open question.
The Rasavadam was understood by very few people at the time. Two famous examples were Nagarjunacharya and Nityanadhiya. Nagarjunacharya was a buddhist monk who, in ancient times, ran the great university of Nagarjuna Sagar. His famous book, Rasaratanakaram, is a famous example of early Indian medicine.
In traditional Indian medicinal terminology 'rasa' translates as 'mercury' and Nagarjunacharya was said to have developed a method to convert the mercury into gold. Much of his original writings are lost to us, but his teachings still have strong influence on traditional Indian medicine (Ayureveda) to this day.
Alchemy in the Greek world
The Greek city of Alexandria in Egypt was a center of Greek alchemical knowledge, and retained its preeminence through most of the Greek and Roman periods. The Greeks appropriated the hermetical beliefs of the Egyptians and melded with them the philosophies of Pythagoreanism, ionianism, and gnosticism. Pythagorean philosophy is, essentially, the belief that numbers rule the universe, originating from the observations of sound, stars, and geometric shapes like triangles, or anything from which a ratio could be derived. Ionian thought was based on the belief that the universe could be explained through concentration on natural phenomena this philosophy is believed to have originated with Thales and his pupil Anaximander, and later developed by Plato and Aristotle, whose works came to be an integral part of alchemy. According to this belief, the universe can be described by a few unified natural laws that can be determined only through careful, thorough, and exacting philosophical explorations. The third component introduced to hermetical philosophy by the Greeks was gnosticism, a belief prevalent in the Christian and early post Christian Roman empire, that the world is imperfect because it was created in a flawed manner, and that learning about the nature of spiritual matter would lead to salvation. They further believed that God did not "create" the universe in the classic sense, but that the universe was created "from" him, but was corrupted in the process (rather than becoming corrupted by the transgressions of Adam and Eve, i.e. original sin). According to Gnostic belief, by worshipping the cosmos, nature, or the creatures of the world, one worships the True God. Gnostics do not seek salvation from sin, but instead seek to escape ignorance, believing that sin is merely a consequence of ignorance. Platonic and neo Platonic theories about universals and the omnipotence of God were also absorbed.
One very important concept introduced at this time, originated by Empedocles and developed by Aristotle, was that all things in the universe were formed from only four elements: ''earth'', ''air'', ''water'', and ''fire''. According to Aristotle, each element had a sphere to which it belonged and to which it would return if left undisturbed.
The four elements of the Greek were mostly qualitative aspects of matter, not quantitative, as our modern elements are. "...True alchemy never regarded earth, air, water, and fire as corporeal or chemical substances in the present day sense of the word. The four elements are simply the primary, and most general, qualities by means of which the amorphous and purely quantitative substance of all bodies first reveals itself in differentiated form." Later alchemists (if Plato and Aristotle can be called alchemists) extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept.
Alchemy in the Roman Empire
The Romans adopted Greek alchemy and metaphysics, just as they adopted much of Greek knowledge and philosophy. By the end of the Roman empire the Greek alchemical philosophy had been joined to the philosophies of the Egyptians to create the cult of Hermeticism.
However, the development of Christianity in the Empire brought a contrary line of thinking, stemming from Augustine (354 430 AD), an early Christian philosopher who wrote of his beliefs shortly before the fall of the Roman Empire. In essence, he felt that reason and faith could be used to understand God, but experimental philosophy was evil: "There is also present in the soul, by means of these same bodily sense, a kind of empty longing and curiosity which aims not at taking pleasure in the flesh but at acquiring experience through the flesh, and this empty curiosity he is dignified by the names of learning and science."
Augustinian ideas were decidedly anti experimental, yet when Aristotelian experimental techniques were made available to the West they were not shunned. Still, Augustinian thought was well ingrained in medieval society and was used to show alchemy as being un Godly.
Much of the Roman knowledge of Alchemy, like that of the Greeks and Egyptians, is now lost. In Alexandria, the centre of alchemical studies in the Roman Empire, the art was mainly oral and in the interests of secrecy little was committed to paper. (Whence the use of "hermetic" to mean "secretive".) It is possible that some writing was done in Alexandria, and that it was subsequently lost or destroyed in fires and the turbulent periods that followed.
Alchemy in the Islamic world
After the fall of the Roman Empire, the focus of alchemical development moved to the Middle East. Much more is known about Islamic alchemy because it was better documented: indeed, most of the earlier writings that have come down through the years were preserved as Islamic translations.
The Islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy. Platonic and Aristotelian thought, which had already been somewhat appropriated into hermetical science, continued to be assimilated. Islamic alchemists such as al Razi (Latin Rasis or Rhazes) contributed key chemical discoveries of their own, such as the technique of distillation (the words ''alembic'' and ''alcohol'' are of Arabic origin), the muriatic, sulfuric, and nitric acids, soda, potash, and more. (From the Arabic names of the last two substances, ''al natrun'' and ''al qal y'', Latinized into ''Natrium'' and ''Kalium'', come the modern symbols for sodium and potassium.) The discovery that aqua regia, a mixture of nitric and muriatic acids, could dissolve the noblest metal gold, was to fuel the imagination of alchemists for the next millennium.
Islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism.
The most influential author in this regard was arguably Jabir Ibn Hayyan (Arabic , Latin Geberus usually rendered in English as Geber). Jabir's ultimate goal was takwin, the artificial creation of life in the alchemical laboratory, up to and including human life. He analyzed each Aristotelian element in terms of four basic qualities of ''hotness'', ''coldness'', ''dryness'', and ''moistness''. According to Geber, in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two were exterior. For example, lead was externally cold and dry, while gold was hot and moist. Thus, Jabir theorized, by rearranging the qualities of one metal, a different metal would result. By this reasoning, the search for the philosopher's stone was introduced to Western alchemy. Jabir developed an elaborate numerology whereby the root letters of a substance's name in Arabic, when treated with various transformations, held correspondences to the element's physical properties.
It is now commonly accepted that Chinese alchemy influenced Arabic alchemists , although the extent of that influence is still a matter of debate. Likewise, Hindu learning was assimilated into Islamic alchemy, but again the extent and effects of this are not well known.
Alchemy in Medieval Europe
, 1771.
Because of its strong connections to the Greek and Roman cultures, alchemy was rather easily accepted into Christian philosophy, and Medieval European alchemists extensively absorbed Islamic alchemical knowledge. Gerbert of Aurillac, who was later to become Pope Silvester II, (d. 1003) was among the first to bring Islamic science to Europe from Spain. Later men such as Adelard of Bath, who lived in the 12th century, brought additional learning. But until the 13th century the moves were mainly assimilative.
In this period there appeared some deviations from the Augustinian principles of earlier Christian thinkers. Saint Anselm (1033 1109) was a Benedictine who believed faith must precede rationalism, as Augustine and most theologians prior to Anselm had believed, but Anselm put forth the opinion that faith and rationalism were compatible and encouraged rationalism in a Christian context. His views set the stage for the philosophical explosion to occur. Peter Abelard followed Anselm's work, laying the foundation for acceptance of Aristotelian thought before the first works of Aristotle reached the West. His major influence on alchemy was his belief that Platonic universals did not have a separate existence outside of man's consciousness. Abelard also systematized the analysis of philosophical contradictions.
Robert Grosseteste (1170 1253) was a pioneer of the scientific theory that would later be used and refined by the alchemists. He took
Abelard's methods of analysis and added the use of observations, experimentation, and conclusions in making scientific evaluations. Grosseteste also did much work to bridge Platonic and Aristotelian thinking.
Albertus Magnus (1193 1280) and Thomas Aquinas (1225 1274) were both Dominicans who studied Aristotle and worked at reconciling the differences between philosophy and Christianity. Aquinas also did a great deal of work in developing the scientific method. He even went as far as claiming that universals could be discovered only through logical reasoning, and, since reason could not run in opposition to God, reason must be compatible with theology. . This ran contrary to the commonly held Platonic belief that universals were found through divine illumination alone. Magnus and Aquinas were among the first to take up the examination of alchemical theory, and could be considered to be alchemists themselves, except that these two did little in the way of experimentation.
The first true alchemist in Medieval Europe was Roger Bacon. His work did as much for alchemy as Robert Boyle's was to do for chemistry and Galileo's for astronomy and physics. Bacon (1214 1294) was an Oxford Franciscan who explored optics and languages in addition to alchemy. The Franciscan ideals of taking on the world rather than rejecting the world led to his conviction that experimentation was more important than reasoning: "Of the three ways in which men think that they acquire knowledge of things: authority, reasoning, and experience only the last is effective and able to bring peace to the intellect." (Bacon p. 367) "Experimental Science controls the conclusions of all other sciences. It reveals truths which reasoning from general principles would never have discovered." Roger Bacon has also been attributed with originating the search for the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life: "That medicine which will remove all impurities and corruptibilities from the lesser metals will also, in the opinion of the wise, take off so much of the corruptibility of the body that human life may be prolonged for many centuries." The idea of immortality was replaced with the notion of long life after all, man's time on Earth was simply to wait and prepare for immortality in the world of God. Immortality on Earth did not mesh with Christian theology.
Bacon was not the only alchemist of the high middle ages, but he was the most significant. His works were used by countless alchemists of the fifteenth through nineteenth centuries. Other alchemists of Bacon's time shared several traits. First, and most obviously, nearly all were members of the clergy. This was simply because few people outside the parochial schools had the education to examine the Arabic derived works. Also, alchemy at this time was sanctioned by the church as a good method of exploring and developing theology. Alchemy was interesting to the wide variety of churchmen because it offered a rationalistic view of the universe when men were just beginning to learn about rationalism.
So by the end of the thirteenth century, alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of belief. Adepts believed in the macrocosm microcosm theories of Hermes, that is to say, they believed that processes that affect minerals and other substances could have an effect on the human body (e.g., if one could learn the secret of purifying gold, one could use the technique to purify the human soul.) They believed in the four elements and the four qualities as described above, and they had a strong tradition of cloaking their written ideas in a labyrinth of coded jargon set with traps to mislead the uninitiated. Finally, the alchemists practiced their art: they actively experimented with chemicals and made observations and theories about how the universe operated. Their entire philosophy revolved around their belief that man's soul was divided within himself after the fall of Adam. By purifying the two parts of man's soul, man could be reunited with God.
In the fourteenth century, these views underwent a major change. William of Ockham, an Oxford Franciscan who died in 1349, attacked the Thomist view of compatibility between faith and reason. His view, widely accepted today, was that God must be accepted on faith alone He could not be limited by human reason. Of course this view was not incorrect if one accepted the postulate of a limitless God versus limited human reasoning capability, but it virtually erased alchemy from practice in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Pope John XXII in the early 1300s issued an edict against alchemy, which effectively removed all church personnel from the practice of the Art. The climate changes, Black plague, and increase in warfare and famine that characterized this century no doubt also served to hamper philosophical pursuits in general.
had these mysterious alchemical symbols carved on his tomb in the Church of the Holy Innocents in Paris.
Alchemy was kept alive by men such as Nicolas Flamel, who was noteworthy only because he was one of the few alchemists writing in those troubled times. Flamel lived from 1330 to 1417 and would serve as the archetype for the next phase of alchemy. He was not a religious scholar as were many of his predecessors, and his entire interest in the subject revolved around the pursuit of the philosopher's stone, which he is reputed to have found his work spends a great deal of time describing the processes and reactions, but never actually gives the formula for carrying out the transmutations. Most of his work was aimed at gathering alchemical knowledge that had existed before him, especially as regarded the philosophers' stone.
Through the high middle ages (1300 1500) alchemists were much like Flamel: they concentrated on looking for the philosophers' stone and the elixir of youth, now believed to be separate things. Their cryptic allusions and symbolism led to wide variations in interpretation of the art. For example, many alchemists during this period interpreted the purification of the soul to mean the transmutation of lead into gold (in which they believed elemental mercury, or 'quicksilver', played a crucial role). These men were viewed as magicians and sorcerers by many, and were often persecuted for their practices.
One of these men who emerged at the beginning of the sixteenth century was named Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa. This alchemist believed himself to be a wizard and actually thought himself capable of summoning spirits. His influence was negligible, but like Flamel, he produced writings which were referred to by alchemists of later years. Again like Flamel, he did much to change alchemy from a mystical philosophy to an occultist magic. He did keep alive the philosophies of the earlier alchemists, including experimental science, numerology, etc., but he added magic theory, which reinforced the idea of alchemy as an occultist belief. In spite of all this, Agrippa still considered himself a Christian, though his views often came into conflict with the church.
Alchemy in the Modern Age and Renaissance
European alchemy continued in this way through the dawning of the Renaissance. The era also saw a flourishing of con artists who would use chemical tricks and sleight of hand to "demonstrate" the transmutation of common metals into gold, or claim to possess secret knowledge that with a "small" initial investment would surely lead to that goal.
The most important name in this period is Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus, (Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493 1541) who cast alchemy into a new form, rejecting some of the occultism that had accumulated over the years and promoting the use of observations and experiments to learn about the human body. He rejected Gnostic traditions, but kept much of the Hermetical, neo Platonic, and Pythagorean philosophies however, Hermetical science had so much Aristotelian theory that his rejection of Gnosticism was practically meaningless. In particular, Paracelsus rejected the magic theories of Agrippa and Flamel. He did not think of himself as a magician, and scorned those who did. (Williams p.239 45)
Paracelsus pioneered the use of chemicals and minerals in medicine, and wrote "Many have said of Alchemy, that it is for the making of gold and silver. For me such is not the aim, but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines." His hermetical views were that sickness and health in the body relied on the harmony of man the microcosm and Nature the macrocosm. He took an approach different from those before him, using this analogy not in the manner of soul purification but in the manner that humans must have certain balances of minerals in their bodies, and that certain illnesses of the body had chemical remedies that could cure them. While his attempts of treating diseases with such remedies as Mercury might seem ill advised from a modern point of view, his basic idea of chemically produced medicines has stood time surprisingly well.
, 73 x 130 cm, Museum of Arts in d .
In England, the topic of alchemy in that time frame is often associated with Doctor John Dee (13 July 1527 December, 1608), better known for his role as astrologer, cryptographer, and general "scientific consultant" to Queen Elizabeth I. Dee was considered an authority on the works of Roger Bacon, and was interested enough in alchemy to write a book on that subject (''Monas Hieroglyphica'', 1564) influenced by the Kabbala. Dee's associate Edward Kelley who claimed to converse with angels through a crystal ball and to own a powder that would turn mercury into gold may have been the source of the popular image of the alchemist charlatan.
Another lesser known alchemist was Michael Sendivogius (''Micha S dziw j'', 1566 1636), a Polish alchemist, philosopher, medical doctor and pioneer of chemistry. According to some accounts, he distilled oxygen in a lab sometime around 1600, 170 years before Scheele and Priestley, by warming nitre (saltpetre). He thought of the gas given off as "the elixir of life". Shortly after discovering this method, it is believed that Sendivogious taught his technique to Cornelius Drebbel. In 1621, Drebbel practically applied this in a submarine.
Tycho Brahe (1546 1601), better known for his astronomical and astrological investigations, was also an alchemist. He had a laboratory built for that purpose at his Uraniborg observatory research institute.
The decline of Western alchemy
The demise of Western alchemy was brought about by the rise of modern science with its emphasis on rigorous quantitative experimentation and its disdain for "ancient wisdom". Although the seeds of these events were planted as early as the 17th century, alchemy still flourished for some two hundred years, and in fact may have reached its apogee in the 18th century.
Robert Boyle (1627 1691), better known for his studies of gases (cf. Boyle's law) pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations. He assumed nothing in his experiments and compiled every piece of relevant data in a typical experiment, Boyle would note the place in which the experiment was carried out, the wind characteristics, the position of the Sun and Moon, and the barometer reading, all just in case they proved to be relevant. This approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 18th and 19th centuries, based on revolutionary discoveries of Lavoisier and John Dalton which finally provided a logical, quantitative and reliable framework for understanding matter transmutations, and revealed the futility of longstanding alchemical goals such as the philospher's stone.
Meanwhile, Paracelsian alchemy led to the development of modern medicine. Experimentalists gradually uncovered the workings of the human body, such as blood circulation (Harvey, 1616), and eventually traced many diseases to infections with germs (Koch and Pasteur, 19th century) or lack of ''natural'' nutrients and vitamins (Lind, Eijkman, Funk, et al.). Supported by parallel developments in organic chemistry, the new science easily displaced alchemy from its medical roles, interpretive and prescriptive, while deflating its hopes of miraculous elixirs and exposing the ineffectiveness or even toxicity of its remedies.
Thus, as science steadily continued to uncover and rationalize the clockwork of the universe, founded on its own materialistic metaphysics, Alchemy was left deprived of its chemical and medical connections but still incurably burdened by them. Reduced to an arcane philosophical system, poorly connected to the material world, it suffered the common fate of other esoteric disciplines such as astrology and Kabbalah: excluded from university curricula, shunned by its former patrons, ostracized by scientists, and commonly viewed as the epitome of charlatanism and superstition.
These developments could be interpreted as part of a broader reaction in European intellectualism against the Romantic movement of the preceding century. Be as it may, it is sobering to observe how a discipline that held so much intellectual and material prestige, for more than two thousand years, could disappear so easily from the universe of Western thought.
Modern 'alchemy'
In modern times, progress has been made toward achieving the goals of alchemy using scientific, rather than alchemic, means. These developments may on occasion be called "alchemy" for rhetorical reasons.
In 1919, Ernest Rutherford used artificial disintegration to convert nitrogen into oxygen. This process of bombarding the atomic nucleus with high energy particles is the principle behind modern particle accelerators, in which transmutations of elements are common. Indeed, in 1980, Glenn Seaborg transmuted lead into gold, though the amount of energy used and the microscopic quantities created negated any possible financial benefit.
In 1964, George Ohsawa and Michio Kushi, based on the claims of Louis Kervran, reportedly successfully transmutated sodium into potassium, by use of an electric arc, and later of carbon and oxygen into iron. In 1994, R. Sundaresan and J. Bockris reported that they had observed fusion reactions in electrical discharges between carbon rods immersed in water. However, none of these claims have been replicated by other scientists, and the idea is now thoroughly discredited.
As of 2006, a universal panacea remains elusive, though futurists such as Ray Kurzweil believe sufficiently advanced nanotechnology may prolong life indefinitely. Some say the third goal of alchemy has been fulfilled by IVF and the cloning of a human embryo, although these technologies fall far short of creating a human life from scratch.
The aim of artificial intelligence research could be said to be creating a life from scratch, and those philosophically opposed to the possibility of AI have compared it with alchemy, such as Herbert and Stuart Dreyfus in their 1960 paper ''Alchemy and AI''.
Alchemy in art and entertainment
References to alchemy in art and entertainment are far too numerous to list. Here we give only a few indicative samples. More titles can be found in the philosopher's stone article.
Novels and plays
Many writers lampooned alchemists and used them as the butt of satirical attacks. Two early and well known examples are
Geoffrey Chaucer, ''Canon's Yeoman's Tale'' (ca. 1380). The main character, an alchemist on the way to Canterbury, claims that he will "pave it all of silver and of gold".
Ben Jonson, ''The Alchemist'' (ca 1610). In this five act play, the characters set up an alchemy workshop to swindle people.
In more recent works, alchemists are generally presented in a more romatic or mystic light, and often little distinction is made between alchemy, magic, and witchcraft:
Mary Shelley, ''Frankenstein'' (1818). Victor Frankenstein uses both alchemy and modern science to create Frankenstein's monster.
Goethe, ''Faust, Part 2'' (1832). Faust's servant Wagner uses alchemy to create a homunculus.
Gabriel Garc a M rquez, ''One Hundred Years of Solitude'' (1967). An alchemist named Melqu ades adds to the novel's surreal atmosphere.
Paulo Coelho, ''The Alchemist'' (1988).
J. K. Rowling, ''Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone'' (1997). Features Nicholas Flamel as a character.
Neal Stephenson, ''The Baroque Cycle'' (2003 2004). Features real and imaginary alchemists such as Isaac Newton, de Duillier, and Enoch Root.
Martin Booth, ''Doctor Illuminatus: The Alchemist's Son'' (2003).
Margaret Mahy, ''Alchemy'' (2004).
John Fasman, ''The Geographer's Library''! DATE?? , whose plot revolves around thirteen alchemical artifacts.
Gregory Keyes, ''Age of Unreason''! DATE?? . Features Isaac Newton and de Duillier.
Cornelia Funke, ''Dragon Rider'' (2004). Twigleg the homonculus was created by an alchemist.
Comics, manga, and video games
Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, ''Fantastic Four'' comics (ca. 1962 ). Villain Diablo is an alchemist.
Darklands PC game (1992). Alchemy features prominently throughout the game.
Mike Mignola's ''Hellboy'' comics (1993 ). The character Roger the Homunculus was created by alchemy.
Nintendo's Golden Sun video game (2001). Alchemy is an evil force that threatens the world.
Hiromu Arakawa, ''Fullmetal Alchemist'' (2002 ). 'Alchemists' can transform anything within the principle of Equivalent Exchange.
Nobuhiro Watsuki, ''Weapon Alchemist'' manga (2003? ).
Kazuki Takahashi, ''Yu Gi Oh! GX'' anime (2004 ). The character Daitokuji is an alchemist who preserved his soul within a homunculus.
Nintendo's Final Fantasy Tactics Advance video game (2003). Has a playable class called Alchemist.
Bethesda Softworks' The Elder Scrolls III: Morrowind prominently features alchemy as a method of creating various potions for use by the player.
Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb computer game (2003). A large portion of the game is centered around a castle in Prague formerly owned by an alchemist king.
World of Warcraft computer game (2004). Alchemy is one of the professions the player can learn.
! Please provide dates
Music
Tool (band), album ''Lateralus'' (2001).
References
Trans. Rex Warner.
Trans. William Stoddart.
Cavendish, Richard, The Black Arts, Perigee Books
6th ed.
Trans. Richard Dales.
2nd ed.
See also
Other alchemical pages
Vulcan of the alchemists
Philosopher's stone
Hermeticism
Astrology and alchemy
Transmutation
Duality
The four humours
Alkahest, arcanum, berith, elixir, quintessence
Alembic
Alchemical symbol!
Circle with a point at its centre
Gold water
Related and alternative philosophies
Western mystery tradition
Astrology
Necromancy, magic,
Esotericism, Rosicrucianism, Illuminati
Taoism and the Five Elements
Kayaku Jutsu
Acupuncture, moxibustion, ayurveda, homeopathy
Anthroposophy
Psychology and Carl Jung
New Age
Scientific connections
Chemistry
Physics
Scientific method
Protoscience, Pseudoscience, and Anti science
Obsolete scientific theories
Historicism
Substances of the alchemists
gold silver lead copper zinc mercury
phosphorus sulfur arsenic antimony
vitriol cinnabar pyrites orpiment galena
magnesia lime potash natron saltpetre kohl
ammonia ammonium chloride alcohol camphor
Acids: sulfuric muriatic nitric acetic formic citric tartaric
aqua regia gunpowder
Other resources
List of alchemists
List of occultists
External links
Some websites discussing the original notion of alchemical transmutation:
A pictorial and written archive of mythological, ritualistic, and symbolic images from all over the world and from all epochs of human history.
Alchemy
: from alchemy to chemistry, tracing the contributions of Paracelsus
: World's First Museum Dedicated to Alchemy in All Its Aspects
: Analytical study of the archaeological remains of an alchemical laboratory
, 1913, from Project Gutenberg
: A collection of many alchemical texts and other alchemical information
Some websites which appear to espouse modern versions of alchemy:
(Robert Nelson).
Eases study of the complex Healing Tao qi gong (chi kung) system. Essays by experienced students and instructors.
Category:Alchemy
Category:Ancient Egypt
Category:Arabic words
Category:Esoteric schools of thought
Category:Gold
Category:History of ideas
Category:Obsolete scientific theories
af:Alchemie
bg:
ca:Alqu mia
cs:Alchymie
da:Alkymi
de:Alchemie
eo:Alkemio
es:Alquimia
et:Alkeemia
fi:Alkemia
fr:Alchimie
he:
hr:Alkemija
id:Alkimia
io:Alkemio
it:Alchimia
ja:
la:Alchemia
lt:Alchemija
nl:Alchemie
nn:Alkymi
pl:Alchemia
pt:Alquimia
ru:
sk:Alch mia
sl:Alkimija
su:Alk mi
sv:Alkemi
th:
tl:Alkimiya
tr:Simya
uk:
zh:
'''Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast''' (also called '''ADS B''') is a system by which airplanes constantly broadcast their current position and altitude, category of aircraft, airspeed, identification, and whether the aircraft is turning, climbing or descending over a dedicated radio datalink. This functionality is known as "ADS B out" and is the basic level of ADS B functionality.
The ADS B system was developed in the 1990s. It relies on data from the Global Positioning System, or any navigation system that provides an equivalent or better service. The maximum range of the system is line of sight, typically less than 200 nautical miles (370 km).
The ADS B transmissions are received by air traffic control stations, and all other ADS B equipped aircraft within reception range. Reception by aircraft of ADS B data is known as "ADS B in".
Usage
The initial use of ADS B is expected to be by air traffic control and for surveillance purposes and for enhancing pilot situational awareness. ADS B is lower cost than conventional radar and permits higher quality surveillance of airborne and surface movements. ADS B is effective in remote areas or in mountainous terrain where there is no radar coverage, or where radar coverage is limited. The outback of Australia is one such area where ADS B will provide surveillance where previously none existed. ADS B also enhances surveillance on the airport surface, so it can also be used to monitor traffic on the taxiways and runways of an airport.
ADS B equipped aircraft may also have a display unit in the cockpit picturing surrounding air traffic from ADS B data (ADS B in) and TIS B (Traffic Information Service Broadcast) data derived from air traffic radar. Both Pilots and air traffic controllers will then be able to "see" the positions of air traffic in the vicinity of the aircraft, and this may be used to provide an ASAS (Airborne Separation Assurance System).
Airborne Collision Avoidance Systems may in the future also make use of "ADS B in", supplementing the existing TCAS collision avoidance system by what is called 'hybrid surveillance'.
Airbus and Boeing are now expected to include ADS B out (i.e. the transmitter of information) as standard on new build aircraft from 2005 onwards. This is in part due to the European requirements for Mode S Elementary Surveillance (which uses 1090MHz Mode S transponder which now is normally capable of ADS B via Extended Squitter), and some common functionality with ADS B out.
Addressed and Broadcast ADS
The Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) Free Flight Selection Committee defines surveillance as detection, tracking, characterization and observation of aircraft, other vehicles and weather phenomena for the purpose of conducting flight operations in a safe and efficient manner."
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) is described as the process of creating and sending a message including the sender s current position and other surveillance information, such as velocity, intent and flight identification. This information supports aircraft separation management by improving surveillance information at increased ranges, situational awareness and decision making. ADS data can be used in cooperation with data from current radar beacon systems, such as Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon Systems (ATCRBS), Mode S, Traffic Collision Avoidance Systems (TCAS) and primary Air Traffic Control (ATC) radar, and may also be used as a sole means of surveillance.
There are two commonly recognized types of ADS for aircraft applications:
ADS Addressed (ADS A), also known as ADS Contract (ADS C), and
ADS Broadcast (ADS B.
ADS A provides a surveillance data report that is sent to a specific addressee. For example, ADS A reports are employed in the Future Air Navigation System (FANS) using the Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) as the communication protocol. During transoceanic flight, reports are periodically sent by an aircraft to the controlling air traffic region.
When ADS B is used, aircraft and other vehicles continuously broadcast a message including position, heading, velocity and intent. Other uses may include obstacles transmitting a position message. Aircraft, ground based stations, and other users monitoring the channels can receive the information and use it in a wide variety of applications. Because of this potential for broad utilization, a system using ADS B is most often discussed as a replacement for or an augmentation to current methods of monitoring aeronautical traffic.
To understand the full capability of ADS B, consider how the current Air Traffic Control system creates information. The radar measures the range and bearing of an aircraft. Bearing is measured by the position of the rotating radar antenna when it receives a response to its interrogation from the aircraft, and range is measured by the time it takes for the radar to receive the interrogation response.
The antenna beam becomes wider as the aircraft get farther away, making the position information less accurate. Additionally, detecting changes in aircraft velocity requires several radar sweeps that are spaced several seconds apart. In contrast, a system using ADS B creates and listens for periodic position and intent reports from aircraft. These reports are generated and distributed using precise
instruments, such as the global positioning system (GPS) and Mode S transponders, meaning integrity of the data is no longer susceptible to the range of the aircraft or the length of time between radar sweeps. The enhanced accuracy of the information will be used to improve safety, support a wide variety of applications and increase airport and airspace capacity.
Use of ADS B for ground based surveillance requires only ADS B Out (transmit) capability on the aircraft. With the addition of ADS B In (receive) capability, the potential for ADS B applications grows significantly. Some of the equipment and services associated with ADS B In capability include:
Cockpit Display of Traffic Information (CDTI), a display of proximate traffic based on ADS B reports from other aircraft and ground based facilities.
Traffic Information Services Broadcast (TIS B), a ground based uplink report of proximate traffic that is under surveillance by ATC but is not ADS B equipped. This service would be available even with limited ADS B implementation.
Flight Information Services Broadcast (FIS B), a ground based uplink of flight information services and weather data.
ADS B Physical Layer
Three link solutions are being proposed as the physical layer for relaying the ADS B position reports:
1090 MHz Mode S Extended Squitter (ES),
Universal Access Transceiver (UAT) and
VHF Digital Link (VDL) Mode 4.
Mode S
The FAA has announced its selection of the 1090 MHz ES and UAT as the mediums for the ADS B system in the United States. 1090 MHz ES will be the primary medium for air carrier and high performance commercial aircraft while UAT will be the primary medium for general aviation aircraft.
Europe has also chosen 1090 MHz as the primary physical layer for ADS B. However, the second medium has not yet been selected between UAT and VDL Mode 4.
With 1090 ES, the existing Mode S transponder (or a stand alone 1090 MHz transmitter) supports a message type known as the ES message. It is a periodic message that provides position, velocity, heading, time, and, in the future, intent. The basic ES does not offer intent since current flight management systems do not provide such data called trajectory change points. To enable an aircraft to send an extended squitter message, the transponder is modified and aircraft position and other status information is routed to the transponder. ATC ground stations and TCAS equipped aircraft already have the necessary 1090 MHz receivers to receive these signals, and would only require
enhancements to accept and process the additional information. 1090 ES will not support FIS B, due to regulatory requirements.
Universal Access Transceiver
The UAT system is specifically designed for ADS B operation. A 1 MHz channel in the 900 MHz frequency range is dedicated for transmission of airborne ADS B reports and for broadcast of ground based aeronautical information. UAT users would have access to the additional ground based aeronautical data and would receive reports from proximate traffic (FIS B and TIS B).
VDL Mode 4
The VDL Mode 4 system could utilize one or more of the existing aeronautical VHF frequencies as the radio frequency physical layer for ADS B transmissions. VDL Mode 4 uses a protocol (STDMA) that allows it to be self organizing, meaning no master ground station is required. This medium is best used for short message transmissions from a large number of users. VDL Mode 4 systems are capable of increased range in comparison to L Band Mode S (1090 MHz) or UAT systems.
Implementation Timetable
The timetable for airborne ADS B equipage will be determined by ground and airborne facility implementation, equipment cost, perceived benefits of equipping and regulatory actions by the Civil Aviation Authorities (CAA). The cost to equip with ADS B Out capability is relatively small and would benefit the airspace by enabling increased situational awareness. ADS B In capability can provide additional benefits when ground stations and the critical mass of aircraft are also equipped. This data was taken into consideration when building the following estimated implementation timetable.
Near term Implementation (2006 2008)
The next three years will see a continuation of ADS B trials and some implementation in pockets where limited aircraft equipage can bring operational benefits. Some of these include:
'''Capstone'''. In Alaska, the FAA is conducting its Capstone program to improve surveillance in some of the more remote locations of Alaska and as a test bed for implementing elements of ADS B into the ATC environment. Approximately 190 general aviation users have been equipped with GPS receivers, UAT transceivers and flight deck displays. In addition, 11 ground based transceivers have been installed for radar like services, and flight information services data (FIS B), including weather information, is being uplinked from the ground. Phase II of the program will expand the coverage and add more than 250 additional users.
'''Gulf of Mexico''' In the Gulf of Mexico, where ATC radar coverage is incomplete, the FAA is locating ADS B (1090 MHz) receivers on oil rigs and buoys to relay information received from aircraft equipped with ADS B extended squitters back to the ATC centers to expand and improve surveillance coverage.
'''Australia'''. Australia is implementing ADS B trials in Queensland to test the feasibility of 1090 MHz ADS B as an alternative to ground based radar. ADS B is expected to be a much more cost effective method of providing ATC surveillance coverage for remote areas which currently have limited or no surveillance coverage.
'''Cargo Airline Association'''. Cargo carriers operating at their hub airports operate largely at night. Equipage of these aircraft with ADS B and CDTI displays along with a ground based transceiver at these hubs will allow better situational awareness at night and in inclement weather and offers the potential for increased airport traffic handling capability.
'''Embry Riddle Aeronautical University'''. Embry Riddle Aeronautical University is equipping the training aircraft at its two main campuses in Florida and Arizona with ADS B capability as a safety enhancement. The FAA will provide FIS B and TIS B uplink capabilities in those areas in support of this equipage.
'''Safe Flight 21 East Coast Broadcast Services'''. The FAA has announced its intention to implement ADS B coverage for the entire east coast of the U.S. by the end of 2004. Service range will extend inland 150 miles with a goal of providing coverage at altitudes down to 2,000 feet. The medium will be UAT and the implementation will also include TIS B and FIS B information.
Mid term Implementation (2008 2012)
Within four to eight years, an increasing number of aircraft with ADS B Out capability along with the start of ground based ADS B infrastructure will begin to make a number of ADS B applications attractive.
Benefits of Pockets of Implementation will become evident and these areas will be expanded, encouraging more users to equip with ADS B capability.
Beginning in 2004 the FAA is expected to deploy ADS B ground infrastructure based on ASDE X equipment. This infrastructure will allow the use of ADS B data for ATC purposes such as surface movement tracking guidance and airborne surveillance.
Ground uplinks of TIS B and FIS B will commence where the ground infrastructure is deployed.
Other Civil Aviation Authorities may install ADS B ground infrastructure and require aircraft to be equipped with ADS B Out for operation in selected airspace. Australia is expected to be the first country to do so however, a number of other countries with limited surveillance coverage may find ADS B an attractive alternative to radar surveillance.
Significant numbers of users will become equipped with a minimum of ADS B Out capability. In Europe, 1090 MHz ES will become standard capability for all new Mode S transponder installations after 31 March, 2005. UAT will become increasingly popular in the upper end of the general aviation market.
Airport Situational Awareness A combination of detailed airport maps, airport multilateration (ASDE X) systems, enhanced aircraft displays and ADS B have the potential to significantly improve Runway situational awareness.
Oceanic In trail ADS B can provide enhanced situational awareness and safety for Oceanic In trail maneuvers as additional aircraft become equipped.
Use of ADS B and CDTI will allow decreased approach spacing and closely spaced parallel approaches at congested airports with improved safety and capacity during low lower visibility operations.
Long term Implementations (2012 and beyond)
Air carriers fleets will achieve intended ADS B benefits in the terminal and en route airspace.
New Aircraft Separation Assurance applications will take advantage of the increased situational awareness and positional accuracy available in an airspace environment largely equipped with ADS B capability.
FIS B and TIS B services will encourage general aviation equipage in all market segments.
References
See also
DO 212 Minimal Operational Performance Standards for Airborne Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Equipment
External links
Jane's Airport Review
Category:Avionics
Infobox Country
common name Austria
native name Republik sterreich
image flag Flag of Austria.svg
image coat Austria Bundesadler.svg
image map LocationAustria.png
national motto none
national anthem Land der Berge, Land am Strome
official languages GermanbrSlovenian(reg.) Croatian(reg.) Hungarian(reg.)
capital Vienna latd 48 latm 12 latNS N longd 16 longm 21 longEW E
largest city Vienna
government type Republic
leader titles PresidentbrChancellor
leader names Heinz FischerbrWolfgang Sch ssel
area 83,871 area rank 113th area magnitude 1 E10 percent water 1.3
areami 32,383 ! Do not remove WP:MOSNUM
population estimate 8,206,524 population estimate year 2005 population estimate rank 86th
population density 97 population density rank 78th
population densitymi 251 ! Do not remove WP:MOSNUM
population census 8,032,926 population census year 2001
GDP PPP 267 billion GDP PPP year 2005 GDP PPP rank 35th
GDP nominal 318 billion GDP nominal year 2005 GDP nominal rank 22nd
GDP PPP per capita 32,962 GDP PPP per capita rank 9th
GDP nominal per capita 39,292 GDP nominal per capita rank 10th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.936
HDI rank 17th
HDI category font color " 009900"high font
sovereignty type Independence
established events From Austria Hungary established dates br1919
currency Euro currency code EUR
time zone CET utc offset 1
time zone DST CEST utc offset DST 2
cctld .at
calling code 43
footnotes Prior to 2002: Austrian Schilling
The '''Republic of Austria''' (German: ''Republik sterreich)'' is a landlocked country in central Europe. It borders Germany and the Czech Republic to the north, Slovakia and Hungary to the east, Slovenia and Italy to the south, and Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the west. The capital is the city of Vienna.
Austria is a parliamentary representative democracy consisting of nine federal states and is one of two European countries that have declared their everlasting neutrality, the other being Switzerland. Austria is a member of the United Nations (since 1955) and the European Union (since 1995). For the first half of 2006 Austria holds the seat of the Presidency of the EU.
Origin and history of the name
The German name '' sterreich'' can be translated into English as the "eastern realm", which is derived from the Old German ''Ostarr chi''. ''Reich'' can also mean "empire", and this connotation is the one that is understood in the context of the Austrian Austro Hungarian Empire, Holy Roman Empire, although not in the context of the modern Republic of '' sterreich''. The term probably originates in a vernacular translation of the Medieval Latin name for the region: ''Marchia orientalis'', which translates as "eastern border", as it was situated at the eastern edge of the Holy Roman Empire, that was also mirrored in the name ''Ostmark'' applied after ''Anschluss'' to Germany.
History
Austria and the Holy Roman Empire
The territory of Austria originally known as the Celtic kingdom of Noricum, was a long time ally of Rome. It was occupied rather than conquered by the Romans during the reign of Augustus and made the province Noricum in 16 BC. Later it was conquered by Huns, Rugii, Lombards, Ostrogoths, Bavarii, Avars (until c. 800), and Franks (in that order). Finally, after 48 years of Hungarian rule (907 to 955), the core territory of Austria was awarded to Leopold of Babenberg in 976. Being part of the Holy Roman Empire the Babenbergs ruled and expanded Austria from the 10th century to the 13th century.
thumb left 250px Battle of Vienna 1683
After Duke Frederick II died in 1246 and left no successor, Rudolf I of Habsburg gave the lands to his sons marking the beginning of the line of the Habsburgs, who continued to govern Austria until the 20th century.
With the short exception of Charles VII Albert of Bavaria, Austrian Habsburgs held the position of German Emperor beginning in 1438 with Albert II of Habsburg until the end of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 14th and 15th century Austria continued to expand its territory until it reached the position of a European imperial power at the end of the 15th century until the end of the Habsburg monarchy in 1918.
Modern history
Just two years before the abolition of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, in 1804 the Empire of Austria was founded, which was transformed in 1867 into the dual monarchy Austria Hungary. The empire was split into several independent states in 1918, after the defeat of the Central Powers in World War I, with most of the German speaking parts becoming a republic. (See Treaty of Saint Germain.) Between 1918 and 1919 it was officially known as the Republic of German Austria (''Republik Deutsch sterreich''). After the Entente powers forbade German Austria to unite with Germany, they also forbade the name, and then it was changed to simply Republic of Austria. The democratic republic lasted until 1933 when the chancellor Engelbert Dollfu established an autocratic regime oriented towards Italian fascism (Austrofascism).
Austria became part of Germany in 1938 through the Anschlu and remained under Nazi rule until the end of World War II. After the defeat of the Axis Powers, the Allies occupied Austria until 1955, when the country became a fully independent republic under the condition that it would remain neutral (see: Austrian State Treaty). Austria also became a member of the UN in the same year. After the collapse of communist states in Eastern Europe, Austria became increasingly involved in European affairs, and in 1995, Austria joined the European Union, and the Euro monetary system in 1999.
Politics
thumb right 300px Austrian Parliament in Vienna
Austria became a federal, parliamentarian, democratic republic through the Federal Constitution of 1920. It was reintroduced in 1945 to the nine states of the Federal Republic. The head of state is the Federal President, who is directly elected. The chairman of the Federal Government is the Federal Chancellor, who is appointed by the president. The government can be removed from office by either a presidential decree or by vote of no confidence in the lower chamber of parliament, the Nationalrat.
The Parliament of Austria consists of two chambers. The composition of the Nationalrat is determined every four years by a free general election in which every citizen is allowed to vote to fill its 183 seats. A "Four Percent Hurdle" prevents a large splintering of the political landscape in the Nationalrat by awarding seats only to political parties that have obtained at least a four percent threshold of the general vote, or alternatively, have won a direct seat, or ''Direktmandat'', in one of the 43 regional election districts. The Nationalrat is the dominant chamber in the formation of legislation in Austria. However, the upper house of parliament, the Bundesrat has a limited right of veto (the Nationalrat can in most cases pass the respective bill a second time bypassing the Bundesrat altogether). A convention, called the '' sterreichKonvent'' was convened in June 30, 2003 to decide upon suggestions to reform the constitution, but has failed to produce a proposal that would receive the two thirds of votes in the Nationalrat necessary for constitutional amendments and or reform. However some important parts of the final report were generally agreed upon and are still expected to be implemented.
Subdivisions
A federal republic, Austria is divided into nine states, (German: ''Bundesl nder''). These states are divided into districts (''Bezirke'') and cities (''Statutarst dte''). Districts are subdivided into municipalities (''Gemeinden''). Cities have the competencies otherwise granted to both districts and municipalities. The states are not mere administrative divisions, but have some distinct legislative authority separate from the federal government.
border style "border collapse:collapse"
!colspan 2 In English
!colspan 2 In German
!State !! Capital !! State !! Capital
'''1''' Burgenland Eisenstadt Burgenland Eisenstadt
'''2''' Carinthia Klagenfurt K rnten Klagenfurt
'''3''' Lower Austria St. P lten Nieder sterreich St. P lten
'''4''' Upper Austria Linz Ober sterreich Linz
'''5''' Salzburg Salzburg Salzburg (Land) Salzburg
'''6''' Styria Graz Steiermark Graz
'''7''' Tyrol Innsbruck Tirol Innsbruck
'''8''' Vorarlberg Bregenz Vorarlberg Bregenz
'''9''' Vienna Vienna Wien (Land) Wien
Geography
thumb left 240px Topography of Austria
Austria is a largely mountainous country due to its location in the Alps. The Central Eastern Alps, Northern Limestone Alps and Southern Limestone Alps are all partly in Austria. Of the total area of Austria (84,000 km or 32,000sq.mi), only about a quarter can be considered low lying, and only 32 of the country is below 500 metres (1,640ft). The high mountainous Alps in the west of Austria flatten somewhat into low lands and plains in the east of the country.
Austria may be divided into 5 different areas. The biggest area are the Austrian Alps, which constitute 62 of Austria's total area. The Austrian foothills at the base of the Alps and the Carpathians account for around 12 of its area. The foothills in the east and areas surrounding the periphery of the Pannoni low country amount to about 12 of the total landmass. The second greater mountain area (much lower than the Alps) is situated in the north. Known as the Austrian granite plateau, it is located in the central area of the Bohemian Mass, and accounts for 10 of Austria. The Austrian portion of the Viennese basin comprises the remaining 4 .
Climate
The greater part of Austria lies in the cool temperate climate zone in which humid westerly winds predominate. With over half of the country dominated by the Alps the alpine climate is the predominant one. In the East the climate shows continental features with less rain than the areas with high rainfall averages.
The six highest mountains in Austria are:
bgcolor DDDDDD
!
! Name
! Height(m)
!Height(ft)
! Range
bgcolor EEEEEE
1 Gro glockner
3,797 m 12,457 ft Hohe Tauern
bgcolor EEEEEE
2 Wildspitze 3,768 m 12,362 ft tztal Alps
bgcolor EEEEEE
3 Wei kugel 3,739 m 12,267 ft tztal Alps
bgcolor EEEEEE
4 Gro venediger 3,674 m 12,054 ft Hohe Tauern
bgcolor EEEEEE
5 Similaun 3,606 m 11,831 ft tztal Alps
bgcolor EEEEEE
6 Gro es Wiesbachhorn 3,571 m 11,715 ft Hohe Tauern
bgcolor EEEEEE
Economy
Palace, an example of the Baroque
Austria has a well developed social market economy and a high standard of living. Until the 1980s many of Austria's largest industry firms were nationalised, however in recent years privatisation has reduced state holdings to a level comparable to other European economies. Labour movements are particularly strong in Austria and have large influence on labour politics.
Germany has historically been the main trading partner of Austria, making it vulnerable to rapid changes in the German economy. Slow growth in Germany and elsewhere in the world affected Austria, slowing its growth to 1.2 in 2001. But since Austria became a member state of the European Union it has gained closer ties to other European Union economies, reducing its economic dependence on Germany. In addition, membership in the EU has drawn an influx of foreign investors attracted by Austria's access to the single European market and proximity to EU aspiring economies. Therefore estimates of growth in 2005 (up to 2 ) are much more favourable than in the crippling German economy.
'''Agriculture''': Austrian farms, like those of other west European mountainous countries, are small and fragmented, and production is relatively expensive.
'''Industry''': Although some industries, such as several iron and steel works and chemical plants, are large industrial enterprises employing thousands of people, most industrial and commercial enterprises in Austria are relatively small on an international scale.
'''Services''': Like in other western countries, the biggest contributor to Austria's GDP is its service sector. Most notably is tourism, especially winter tourism.
To meet increased competition from both EU and Central European countries, Austria will need to emphasize knowledge based sectors of the economy, continue to deregulate the service sector, and lower its tax burden.
See also: List of Austrian companies
Demographics
thumb right 300px Vienna during the first half of the 18th century, painting by Canaletto.
Austria's capital Vienna is one of Europe's major cities with a population exceeding 1.6 million (2 million with suburbs) and constitutes a ''melting pot'' of citizens from all over Central and Eastern Europe. In contrast to this ''Metropolis'', other cities do not exceed 1 million inhabitants, in fact the second largest city Graz is home of 305,000 people (followed by Linz with 180,000, Salzburg with 145,000 and Innsbruck with 134,803 (2005). All other cities have fewer than 100,000 inhabitants.
Austrians of German mother tongue, by far the country's largest group, form 91.1 of Austria's population. The remaining number of Austria's people are of non Austrian descent, many from surrounding countries, especially from the former East Bloc nations. The Austrian federal states of Carinthia and Styria are home to a significant (indigenous) Slovenian minority with around 14,000 members (Austrian census unofficial numbers of Slovene groups speak of about 40,000). So called guest workers ''(Gastarbeiter)'' and their descendants also form an important minority group in Austria. Around 20,000 Hungarians and 30,000 Croatians live in the east most Bundesland, Burgenland (formerly part of Hungary).
The official language, German, is spoken by almost all residents of the country. Austria's mountainous terrain led to the development of many distinct German dialects. All of the dialects in the country, however, belong to Austro Bavarian groups of German dialects, with the exception of the dialect spoken in its west most Bundesland, Vorarlberg, which belongs to the group of Alemannic dialects.
There is also a distinct grammatical standard for Austrian German with a few differences to the German spoken in Germany.
Politics concerning ethnic groups (Volksgruppenpolitik)
An estimated 25,000 40,000 Slovenians in the Austrian state of Carinthia as well as Croatians and Hungarians in Burgenland were recognized as a minority and have enjoyed special rights following the Austrian State Treaty (Staatsvertrag) of 1955. The Slovenians in the Austrian state of Styria (estimated at a number between 1,600 and 5,000) are not recognized as a minority and do not enjoy special rights, although the State Treaty of July 27, 1955 states otherwise.
The right for bilingual topographic signs for the regions where Slovene and Croatian speaking Austrians live alongside with the German speaking population (as required by the 1955 State Treaty) is still to be fully implemented. There is also an undercurrent of thinking amongst parts of the Carenthian population that the Slovenian involvement in the partisan war against the Nazi occupation force was a bad thing, and indeed "Tito partisan" is a not an infrequent insult hurled against members of the minority. Many Carinthians are afraid of Slovenian territorial claims, pointing to the fact that Yugoslav troops entered the state after each of the two World Wars and considering that some official Slovenian atlases still show parts of Carinthia as Slovenian cultural territory. The current governor, J rg Haider, has made this fact a matter of public argument in fall 2005 by refusing to increase the number of bilingual topographic signs in Carinthia. A poll by the K rntner Humaninstitut conducted in January 2006 states that 65 of Carinthians are not in favour of an increase of bilingual topographic signs, since the original requirements set by the State Treaty of 1955 have already been fulfilled according to their point of view. Another interesting phenomenon is the so called "Windischen Theorie" stating that the Slovenians can be split in two groups: actual Slovenians and Windische, based on differences in language between Austrian Slovenians, who were taught Slovenian standard language in school and those Slovenians, who spoke their local Slovenian dialect but went to German schools. To the latter group the term "Windische" (originally the German word for Slovenians) was applied, claiming that they were a different ethnic group. This theory was never generally accepted and has been ultimately rejected several decades ago.
List of cities in Austria
Religion
.
While northern and central Germany was the origin of the Reformation, Austria (and Bavaria) were the heart of the Counter Reformation in the 16th and 17th century, when the absolute monarchy of Habsburg imposed a strict regime to maintain Catholicism's power and influence among Austrians. Despite this establishment of Catholicism as the predominant Christian religion (Protestants have throughout Austria's history remained a relatively small group), Austria's history as a multinational state has made it necessary for Habsburg rulers to deal with a heterogeneous religious population. Religious freedom was declared a constitutional right as early as 1867 and Austria Hungary was home of numerous religions beside Roman Catholicism such as Greek, Serbian, Romanian, Russian, and Bulgarian Orthodox Christians, Jews, Muslims (Austria neighboured the Ottoman empire for centuries), Mormons and both Calvinists and Lutheran Protestants.
Still Austria remained largely influenced by Catholicism. After 1918 First Republic Catholic leaders such as Theodor Innitzer and Ignaz Seipel took leading positions within or close to the Austrian Government and increased their influence during the time of the Austrofascism Catholicism was treated much like a state religion by dictators Engelbert Dollfuss and Kurt Schuschnigg. Although Catholic leaders welcomed the Germans in 1938 during the Anschluss of Austria into Germany, Austrian Catholicism stopped its support of Nazism later on and many former religious public figures became involved with the resistance during the Third Reich. After 1945 a stricter secularism was imposed in Austria and religious influence on politics has nearly vanished.
As of the end of the 20th century about 73 of Austria's population are registered as Roman Catholic, while about 5 consider themselves Protestants. Both these numbers have been on the decline for decades, especially Roman Catholicism, which has suffered an increasing number of seceders of the church. This is due partly to child sexual abuse scandals by priests as well as the alleged unwillingness of the Roman Catholic Church to implement reforms. In addition, Austrian Catholics are obliged to pay a mandatory tax (calculated by income ca 1 ) to the Austrian Roman Catholic Church, which acts as another incentive to leave the church.
About 12 of the population declare that they do not belong to any church or religious community. Of the remaining people, about 180,000 are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church and about 7,300 are Jewish. It has to be noted that the Austrian Jewish Community of 1938 Vienna alone counted more than 200,000, of which solely 4,000 to 5,000 remained after the Second World War. The influx of Eastern Europeans, especially from the former Yugoslav nations, Albania and particularly from Turkey largely contributed to a substantial Muslim minority in Austria around 300,000 are registered as members of various Muslim communities. The numbers of people adhering to the Islam has increased largely during the last years and is expected to grow in the future. Buddhism, which was legally recognized as a religion in Austria in 1983, enjoys widespread acceptance and has a following of 20,000 (10,402 at the 2001 census).
A 2005 survey among 8,000 people in various European countries showed that Austrians are still among the countries with the strongest belief in God. 84 of all Austrians do state they believe in God, with only Poland (97 ), Portugal (90 ) and Russia (87 ) in front of the countries surveyed. This is a much larger figure than the European average of 71 or Germany with 67 .
Culture
thumb left 150px Ludwig Wittgenstein
Although Austria is a small country, its history as a world power and its unique cultural environment in the heart of Europe have generated contributions to mankind in every possible field. One might argue that Austria is internationally best known for its musicians. It has been the birthplace of many famous composers such as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Joseph Haydn, Franz Schubert, Anton Bruckner, Johann Strauss, Sr., Johann Strauss, Jr. or Gustav Mahler as well as members of the Second Viennese School such as Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern or Alban Berg.
Complementing its status as a land of artists, Austria has always been a country of great poets, writers and novelists. It was the home of novelists Arthur Schnitzler, Stefan Zweig, Thomas Bernhard or Robert Musil, of poets Georg Trakl, Franz Werfel, Franz Grillparzer, Rainer Maria Rilke or Adalbert Stifter. Famous contemporary playwrights and novelists are Elfriede Jelinek and Peter Handke. Among Austrian artists and architects one can find painters Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka, Egon Schiele or Friedensreich Hundertwasser, photographer Inge Morath or architect Otto Wagner.
Austria was the cradle of numerous scientists including physicists Ludwig Boltzmann, Lise Meitner, Erwin Schr dinger, Ernst Mach, Wolfgang Pauli, Richard von Mises and Christian Doppler, philosophers Ludwig Wittgenstein and Karl Popper, biologists Gregor Mendel and Konrad Lorenz as well as mathematician Kurt G del. It was home to psychologists Sigmund Freud, Alfred Adler, Paul Watzlawick and Hans Asperger, psychiatrist Viktor Frankl, economists Joseph Schumpeter, Eugen von B hm Bawerk, Ludwig von Mises, and Friedrich Hayek (Austrian School) and Peter Drucker, and engineers such as Ferdinand Porsche and Siegfried Marcus.
Although Austrians can look back with pride on their cultural past, current Austria does not stand back in art and science. Austria hosts a tremendous amount of culture, with its classical music festivals in Vienna, Salzburg and Bregenz, its modern artists and writers, its theatres and opera houses.
List of Austrians
Music of Austria
Miscellaneous topics
Austrian folk dancing
Austrian German
Communications in Austria
Cuisine of Austria
Education in Austria
Foreign relations of Austria
Media in Austria
Military of Austria
Public holidays in Austria
Spanish Riding School
Stamps and postal history of Austria
Tourism in Austria
Transportation in Austria
References
References and bibliography can be found in the more detailed articles linked to in this article
External links
The ''aeiou Encyclopedia'' ( )
Article on Austria
Official homepage of the Austrian National Tourist Office (German, English and other languages)
Cultural meeting place in Manhattan
Bilingual Austrian Search engine and Directory (German, English)
Website of the Federal Chancellery of Austria (German, English)
CIA's Factbook on Austria
Tourism in Austria
Portals on the World Austria
The Symbols of Austria
Country Studies Austria Info
Austrian Radio stations both classical and modern music (live feed)
Austria travel guide
Facts and Information (updated February 2005)
Austria, People of
Category:Landlocked countries
af:Oostenryk
als: sterreich
ang: astr ce
ar:
an:Austria
ast:Austria
bg:
zh min nan:Tang kok
be:
bn:
bs:Austrija
br:Aostria
ca: ustria
cs:Rakousko
cy:Awstria
da: strig
de: sterreich
et:Austria
el:
es:Austria
eo:A strio
eu:Austria
fa:
fo:Eysturr ki
fr:Autriche
fy:Eastenryk
fur:Austrie
ga:An Ostair
gd:An Ostair
gl:Austria sterreich
ko:
hi:
hr:Austrija
io:Austria
id:Austria
ia:Austria
is:Austurr ki
it:Austria
he:
ka:
kw:Estrych
ku:Avusturya
la:Austria
lv:Austrija
lt:Austrija
lb: istr ich
li:Oosteriek
hu:Ausztria
mk:
mt:Awstrija
ms:Austria
na:Austria
nl:Oostenrijk
nds: sterriek
ja:
no: sterrike
nn:Austerrike
oc: ustria
os:
pl:Austria
pt: ustria
ro:Austria
rm:Austria
ru:
se:Nuortariika
sa:
sq:Austria
sh:Austrija
scn:Austria
simple:Austria
sk:Rak sko
sl:Avstrija
sr:
fi:It valta
sv: sterrike
tl:Austria
ta:
th:
vi: o
tr:Avusturya
uk:
yi:
zh:
fiu vro:Austria
Infobox Country the
native name Commonwealth of Australia
common name Australia
image flag Flag of Australia.svg
image coat Aust Coat of Arms (large).jpg
image map LocationAU.png
national motto none (formerly ''Advance Australia'')
national anthem ''Advance Australia Fair''
official languages English (''de facto'')sup1 sup
capital Canberra
latd 35 latm 15 latNS S longd 149 longm 28 longEW E
largest city Sydney
government type Const. monarchy
leader titles Queenbr Governor Generalbr Prime Minister
leader names Elizabeth IIbrMichael JefferybrJohn Howard
area rank 6th
area magnitude 1 E12
area 7,686,850
areami 2,967,909 ! Do not remove WP:MOSNUM
percent water 1
population estimate 20,502,900
population estimate year February 2006
population estimate rank 52nd
population census 18,972,350
population census year 2001
population density 2
population densitymi 5.2 ! Do not remove
population density rank 191st
sovereignty type Independence
established events Constitution Actbr Statute of Westminsterbr Australia Act
established dates From the UK:br1 January 1901br11 December 1931br3 March 1986
currency Dollar
currency code AUD
time zone varioussup2 sup
utc offset 8 10
time zone DST varioussup2 sup
utc offset DST 8 11
cctld .au
calling code 61
GDP PPP year 2006
GDP PPP 674.97 billion
GDP PPP rank 16th
GDP PPP per capita 32,686
GDP PPP per capita rank 13th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.955
HDI rank 3rd
HDI category font color " 009900"high font
footnotes sup1 supEnglish does not have ''de jure'' official status () brsup2 supThere are some minor variations from these three timezones, see States and territories of Australiadiv class "noprint" style "float:right " '' '' div
! PLEASE USE AUSTRALIAN ENGLISH THROUGHOUT THIS ARTICLE
The '''Commonwealth of Australia''' is a country in the Southern Hemisphere comprising the world's smallest continent and a number of islands in the Southern, Indian and Pacific Oceans. Australia's neighbouring countries include Indonesia, East Timor and Papua New Guinea to the north, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and the French dependency of New Caledonia to the northeast, and New Zealand to the southeast.
The continent of Australia has been inhabited for over 40,000 years by Indigenous Australians. After sporadic visits by fishermen from the north and by European explorers and merchants starting in the 17th century, the eastern half of the continent was claimed by the British in 1770 and officially settled as the penal colony of New South Wales on 26 January 1788. As the population grew and new areas were explored, another five largely self governing British Crown Colonies were successively established over the course of the 19th century.
On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated and the Commonwealth of Australia was formed. Since federation, Australia has maintained a stable liberal democratic political system and remains a Commonwealth Realm. The current population of around 20.4 million is concentrated mainly in the large coastal cities of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.
Origin and history of the name
The name Australia is derived from the Latin ''australis'', meaning ''southern''. Legends of an "unknown southern land" (''terra australis incognita'') date back to the Roman times and were commonplace in mediaeval geography, but they were not based on any actual knowledge of the continent. The Dutch adjectival form ''Australische'' ("Australian", in the sense of "southern") was used by Dutch officials in Batavia to refer to the newly discovered land to the south as early as 1638. The first use of the word "Australia" in English was a 1693 translation of ''Les Aventures de Jacques Sadeur dans la D couverte et le Voyage de la Terre Australe'', a 1692 French novel by Gabriel de Foigny under the pen name Jacques Sadeur . ! there was a 1676 version, but it was suppressed Alexander Dalrymple then used it in ''An Historical Collection of Voyages and Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean'', published in 1771. He used the term to refer to the entire South Pacific region, not specifically to the Australian continent. In 1793, George Shaw and Sir James Smith published ''Zoology and Botany of New Holland'', in which they wrote of "the vast island, or rather continent, of Australia, Australasia or New Holland."
, taken from the South Head, from ''A Voyage to Terra Australis''. Sydney was established on this site.
The name "Australia" was popularised by the 1814 work ''A Voyage to Terra Australis'' by the navigator Matthew Flinders. Despite its title, which reflected the view of the Admiralty, Flinders used the word "Australia" in the book, which was widely read and gave the term general currency. Governor Lachlan Macquarie of New South Wales subsequently used the word in his dispatches to England. In 1817 he recommended that it be officially adopted. In 1824, the British Admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially as Australia.
The word "Australia" in Australian English is pronounced as either , or .
History
The first human habitation of Australia is estimated to have occurred between 42,000 and 48,000 years ago. The first Australians were the ancestors of the current Indigenous Australians they arrived via land bridges and short sea crossings from present day Southeast Asia. Most of these people were hunter gatherers, with a complex oral culture and spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the Dreamtime. The Torres Strait Islanders, ethnically Melanesian, inhabited the Torres Strait Islands and parts of far north Queensland they possess distinct cultural practices from the Aborigines.
charted the East coast of Australia on HM Bark ''Endeavour'', claiming the land for Britain in 1770. This replica was built in Fremantle in 1988 for Australia's bicentenary.
The first undisputed recorded European sighting of the Australian continent was made by the Dutch navigator Willem Jansz, who sighted the coast of Cape York Peninsula in 1606. During the 17th century, the Dutch charted the whole of the western and northern coastlines of what they called New Holland, but made no attempt at settlement. In 1770, James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast of Australia, which he named New South Wales and claimed for Britain. The expedition's discoveries provided impetus for the establishment of a penal colony there following the loss of the American colonies that had previously filled that role.
, Tasmania was Australia's largest penal colony.
The British Crown Colony of New South Wales started with the establishment of a settlement at Port Jackson by Captain Arthur Phillip on 26 January 1788. This date was later to become Australia's national day, Australia Day. Van Diemen's Land, now known as Tasmania, was settled in 1803 and became a separate colony in 1825. The United Kingdom formally claimed the western part of Australia in 1829. Separate colonies were created from parts of New South Wales: South Australia in 1836, Victoria in 1851, and Queensland in 1859. The Northern Territory (NT) was founded in 1863 as part of the Province of South Australia. Victoria and South Australia were founded as "free colonies" that is, they were never penal colonies, although the former did receive some convicts from Tasmania. Western Australia was also founded "free", but later accepted transported convicts due to an acute labour shortage. The transportation of convicts to Australia was phased out between 1840 and 1868.
The Indigenous Australian population, estimated at about 350,000 at the time of European settlement, declined steeply for 150 years following settlement, mainly due to infectious disease, forced migration, the removal of children, and other colonial government policies that some historians and Indigenous Australians have argued could be considered tantamount to genocide by today's understanding. Such interpretations of Aboriginal history are disputed by some as being exaggerated or fabricated for political or ideological reasons. This debate is known within Australia as the History Wars. Following the 1967 referendum, the Federal government gained the power to implement policies and make laws with respect to Aborigines. Traditional ownership of land native title was not recognised until the High Court case ''Mabo v Queensland (No 2)'' overturned the notion of Australia as ''terra nullius'' at the time of European occupation.
is played at an ANZAC Day ceremony in Port Melbourne, Victoria, 25 April 2005. Ceremonies such as this are held in virtually every suburb and town in Australia.
A gold rush began in Australia in the early 1850s, and the Eureka Stockade rebellion in 1854 was an early expression of nationalist sentiment. Between 1855 and 1890, the six colonies individually gained responsible government, managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the British Empire. The Colonial Office in London retained control of some matters, notably foreign affairs, defence and international shipping. On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, consultation and voting, and the Commonwealth of Australia was born, as a Dominion of the British Empire. The Australian Capital Territory (ACT) was formed from New South Wales in 1911 to provide a location for the proposed new federal capital of Canberra (Melbourne was the capital from 1901 to 1927). The Northern Territory was transferred from the control of the South Australian government to the Commonwealth in 1911. Australia willingly participated in World War I many Australians regard the defeat of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs) at Gallipoli as the birth of the nation its first major military action. The Gallipoli campaign is often erroneously portrayed as or conceived to have been a solely or mainly ANZAC campaign. The reality was that British deaths during the campaign were twice as high as those of ANZAC forces. Much like Gallipoli, the Kokoda Track Campaign is regarded by many as a nation defining battle from World War II.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between Australia and the United Kingdom, but Australia did not adopt the Statute until 1942. The shock of the United Kingdom's defeat in Asia in 1942 and the threat of Japanese invasion caused Australia to turn to the United States as a new ally and protector. Since 1951, Australia has been a formal military ally of the US under the auspices of the ANZUS treaty. After World War II, Australia encouraged mass immigration from Europe since the 1970s and the abolition of the White Australia policy, immigration from Asia and other parts of the world was also encouraged. As a result, Australia's demography, culture and image of itself were radically transformed. The final constitutional ties between Australia and the United Kingdom ended in 1986 with the passing of the Australia Act 1986, ending any British role in the Australian States, and ending judicial appeals to the UK Privy Council. Australian voters rejected a move to become a republic in 1999 by a 55 majority, but the result is generally viewed in terms of dissatisfaction with the specifics of the proposed republican model rather than attachment to the monarchy. Since the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972, there has been an increasing focus on the nation's future as a part of the Asia Pacific region.
Politics
in Canberra was opened in 1988 replacing the provisional Parliament House building opened in 1927.
The Commonwealth of Australia is a constitutional monarchy and has a parliamentary system of government. Queen Elizabeth II is the Queen of Australia, a role that is distinct from her position as Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom. The Queen is nominally represented by the Governor General although the Constitution gives extensive executive powers to the Governor General, these are normally exercised only on the advice of the Prime Minister. The most notable exercise of the Governor General's reserve powers outside the Prime Minister's direction was the dismissal of the Whitlam Government in the constitutional crisis of 1975.
There are three branches of government.
The legislature: the Commonwealth Parliament, comprising the Queen, the Senate, and the House of Representatives the Queen is represented by the Governor General, who in practice exercises little or no power over the Parliament.
The executive: the Federal Executive Council (the Governor General as advised by the executive councillors) in practice, the councillors are the prime minister and ministers of state, whose advice the Governor General accepts, with rare exceptions.
The judiciary: the High Court of Australia and other federal courts. The State courts became formally independent from the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council when the ''Australia Act'' was passed in 1986.
The bicameral Commonwealth Parliament consists of the Queen, the Senate (the upper house) of 76 senators, and a House of Representatives (the lower house) of 150 members. Members of the lower house are elected from single member constituencies, commonly known as 'electorates' or 'seats'. Seats in the House of Representatives are allocated to states on the basis of population. In the Senate, each state, regardless of population, is represented by 12 senators, with the ACT and the NT each electing two. Elections for both chambers are held every three years typically only half of the Senate seats are put to each election, because senators have overlapping six year terms. The party with majority support in the House of Representatives forms Government, with its leader becoming Prime Minister.
There are three major political parties: the Labor Party, the Liberal Party and the National Party. Independent members and several minor parties including the Greens, Family First and the Australian Democrats have achieved representation in Australian parliaments, mostly in upper houses, although their influence has been marginal. Since the 1996 election, the Liberal National Coalition led by the Prime Minister, John Howard, has been in power in Canberra. In the 2004 election, the Coalition won control of the Senate, the first time that a party (or coalition of governing parties) has done so while in government in more than 20 years. The Labor Party is in power in every state and territory. Voting is compulsory in each state and territory and at the federal level.
States and territories
Australia consists of six states, two major mainland territories, and other minor territories. The states are New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia. The two major mainland territories are the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory.
In most respects, the territories function similarly to the states, but the Commonwealth Parliament can override any legislation of their parliaments. By contrast, federal legislation overrides state legislation only with respect to certain areas as set out in Section 51 of the Constitution all residual legislative powers are retained by the state parliaments, including powers over hospitals, education, police, the judiciary, roads, public transport and local government.
Each state and territory has its own legislature (unicameral in the case of the Northern Territory, the ACT and Queensland, and bicameral in the remaining states). The lower house is known as the Legislative Assembly (House of Assembly in South Australia and Tasmania) and the upper house the Legislative Council. The heads of the governments in each state and territory are called premiers and chief ministers, respectively. The Queen is represented in each state by a governor an administrator in the Northern Territory, and the Governor General in the ACT, have analogous roles.
Australia also has several minor territories the federal government administers a separate area within New South Wales, the Jervis Bay Territory, as a naval base and sea port for the national capital. In addition Australia has the following, inhabited, external territories: Norfolk Island, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and several largely uninhabited external territories: Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands and the Australian Antarctic Territory.
Foreign relations and military
Over recent decades, Australia's foreign relations have been driven by a close association with the United States, through the ANZUS pact and by a desire to develop relationships with Asia and the Pacific, particularly through ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum. In 2005 Australia secured an inaugural seat at the East Asia Summit following its accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation. Australia is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government meetings provide the main forum for co operation. Much of Australia's diplomatic energy is focused on international trade liberalisation. Australia led the formation of the Cairns Group and APEC, and is a member of the OECD and the WTO. Australia has pursued several major bilateral free trade agreements, most recently the Australia US Free Trade Agreement. Australia is a founding member of the United Nations, and maintains an international aid program under which some 60 countries receive assistance. The 2005 06 budget provides A 2.5bn for development assistance as a percentage of GDP, this contribution is less than that of the UN Millennium Development Goals.
Australia's armed forces the Australian Defence Force (ADF) comprise the Royal Australian Navy (RAN), the Australian Army, and the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). All branches of the ADF have been involved in UN and regional peacekeeping (most recently in East Timor, the Solomon Islands and Sudan), disaster relief, and armed conflict, including the 2003 Invasion of Iraq. The government appoints the chief of the Defence Force from one of the armed services the current chief is Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston. In 2005 06, the defence budget is A 17.5bn.
Geography
Australia's 7,686,850 square kilometres (2,967,909 sq.mi) landmass is on the Indo Australian Plate. Surrounded by the Indian, Southern and Pacific oceans, Australia is separated from Asia by the Arafura and Timor seas. Australia has a total 25,760 kilometres (16,007mi) of coastline and claims an extensive Exclusive Economic Zone of 8,148,250 square kilometres (3,146,057sq.mi). This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory.
The Great Barrier Reef, the world's largest coral reef, lies a short distance off the north east coast and extends for over 2,000 kilometres (1,250mi). The world's two largest monoliths are located in Australia, Mount Augustus in Western Australia is the largest and Uluru in central Australia is the second largest. At 2,228 metres (7,310 ft), Mount Kosciuszko on the Great Dividing Range is the highest mountain on the Australian mainland, although Mawson Peak on the remote Australian territory of Heard Island is taller at 2,745 metres (9,006ft).
Climate
The largest part of Australia is desert or semi arid 40 of the landmass is covered by sand dunes. Only the south east and south west corners have a temperate climate and moderately fertile soil. The northern part of the country has a tropical climate: part is tropical rainforests, part grasslands, and very little desert. Australia receives snowfall in some cities, but mostly in towns and at higher evaluations. Climate is highly influenced by ocean currents, including the El Ni o southern oscillation, which is correlated with periodic drought, and the seasonal tropical low pressure system that produces cyclones in northern Australia. Rainfall is highly variable, with frequent droughts. Rising levels of salinity and desertification in some areas.
Australia is situated in the middle of the tectonic plate, and therefore has no active volcanism only extinct volcanos, although it may sometimes receive minor earthquakes. The terrain is mostly heavily weathered, low plateau with deserts, rangelands and a fertile plain in southeast. Tasmania and the Australian Alps do not contain any permanent icefields or glaciers, although they may have existed in the past. The Great Barrier Reef, by far the world's largest coral reef, lies a short distance off the north east coast. Mount Augustus, in Western Australia, is the largest monolith in the world.
Flora and fauna
and the ''Eucalyptus'' make an iconic pair of Australian flora and fauna.
Although most of Australia is semi arid or desert, it covers a diverse range of habitats, from alpine heaths to tropical rainforests. Because of the great age and consequent low levels of fertility of the continent, its extremely variable weather patterns and its long term geographic isolation, much of Australia's biota is unique and diverse. About 85 of flowering plants, 84 of mammals, more than 45 of birds, and 89 of in shore, temperate zone fish are endemic. Many of Australia's ecoregions, and the species within those regions, are threatened by human activities and introduced plant and animal species. The federal ''Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999'' is a legal framework used for the protection of threatened species. Numerous protected areas have been created to protect and preserve Australia's unique ecosystems, 64 wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention, and 16 World Heritage Sites have been established. Australia was ranked 13th in the World on the 2005 Environmental Sustainability Index.
Most Australian plant species are evergreen and many are adapted to fire and drought, including the eucalyptus and acacias. Australia has a rich variety of endemic legume species that thrive in nutrient poor soils because of their symbiosis with Rhizobia bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi. Well known Australian fauna include monotremes (the platypus and echidna) a host of marsupials, including the koala, kangaroo, wombat and birds such as the emu, cockatoo, and kookaburra. The dingo was introduced by Austronesian people that traded with Indigenous Australians around 4000 BCE. Many plant and animal species became extinct soon after human settlement, including the Australian megafauna many more have become extinct since European settlement, among them the Thylacine (Tasmanian Tiger).
Economy
's population is approximately 3.7 million, the second largest in Australia
Australia has a prosperous, Western style mixed economy, with a per capita GDP slightly higher than those of the UK, Germany and France. The country was ranked third in the United Nations' 2005 Human Development Index and sixth in ''The Economist'' worldwide quality of life index 2005. In recent years, the Australian economy has been resilient in the face of global economic downturn. Rising output in the domestic economy has been offsetting the global slump, and business and consumer confidence remains robust. Australia's emphasis on economic reform is often claimed to be key factor behind the economy's strength. In the 1980s, the Labor Party, led by Prime Minister Bob Hawke and Treasurer Paul Keating, started the process of economic reform by floating the Australian dollar in 1983, and deregulating the financial system. Since 1996, the Howard government has continued the process of micro economic reform, including the partial deregulation of the labour market and the privatisation of state owned businesses, most notably in the telecommunications industry. Substantial reform of the indirect tax system was implemented in July 2000 with the introduction of a 10 Goods and Services Tax, which has slightly reduced the heavy reliance on personal and company income tax that still characterises Australia's tax system.
The Australian economy has not suffered a recession since the early 1990s. As of January 2006, unemployment was 5.3 with 10,034,500 persons employed. The service sector of the economy, including tourism, education, and financial services, comprises 69 of GDP. Agriculture and natural resources represent only 3 and 5 of GDP, respectively, but contribute substantially to Australia's export performance. Australia's largest export markets include Japan, China, the United States, South Korea and New Zealand. Areas of concern to some economists include the chronically high current account deficit and also high levels of net foreign debt.
Demographics
is the most populous city in Australia.
Most of the estimated 20.4 million Australians are descended from 19th and 20th century immigrants, the majority from Great Britain and Ireland. Australia's population has quadrupled since the end of World War I , spurred by an ambitious immigration program. In 2001, the five largest groups of the 27.4 of Australians who were born overseas were from the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Italy, Vietnam and China. Following the abolition of the White Australia policy in 1973, numerous government initiatives have been established to encourage and promote racial harmony based on a policy of multiculturalism. Australia s population has increased by about 60 times since European settlement.
The self declared indigenous population including Torres Strait Islanders, who are of Melanesian descent was 410,003 (2.2 of the total population) in 2001, a significant increase from the 1977 census, which showed an indigenous population of 115,953. Indigenous Australians have higher rates of imprisonment and unemployment, lower levels of education and life expectancies for males and females that are 17 years lower than those of other Australians. Perceived racial inequality is an ongoing political and human rights issue for Australians.
wine producing region of South Australia.
In common with many other developed countries, Australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age. A large number of Australians (759,849 for the period 200203) live outside their home country. Australia has maintained one of the most active immigration programs in the world to boost population growth. Most immigrants are skilled the quota includes categories for family members and refugees.
English is the official language, and is spoken and written in a distinct variety known as Australian English. According to the 2001 census, English is the only language spoken in the home for around 80 of the population. The next most common languages spoken at home are Chinese (2.1 ), Italian (1.9 ) and Greek (1.4 ). A considerable proportion of first and second generation migrants are bilingual. It is believed that there were between 200 and 300 Australian Aboriginal languages at the time of first European contact. Only about 70 of these languages have survived, and all but 20 of these are now endangered. An indigenous language remains the main language for about 50,000 (0.02 ) people. Australia has a sign language known as Auslan, which is the main language of about 6,500 deaf people.
Australia has no state religion. The 2001 census identified that 68 of Australians call themselves Christian: 27 identifying themselves as Roman Catholic and 21 as Anglican. Australians that identify themselves as followers of non Christian religions number 5 . A total of 16 were categorised as having "No Religion" (which includes non theistic beliefs such as Humanism, atheism, agnosticism and rationalism) and a further 12 declined to answer or did not give a response adequate for interpretation. As in many Western countries, the level of active participation in church worship is much lower than this weekly attendance at church services is about 1.5 million, about 7.5 of the population.
School attendance is compulsory throughout Australia between the ages of 615 years (16 years in South Australia and Tasmania), contributing to an adult literacy rate that is assumed to be 99 . Government grants have supported the establishment of Australia's 38 universities, and although several private universities have been established, the majority receive government funding. There is a state based system of vocational training colleges, known as TAFE Institutes, and many trades conduct apprenticeships for training new tradespeople. Approximately 58 of Australians between the ages of 25 and 64 have vocational or tertiary qualifications.
Culture
) by Arthur Streeton (1889) is an early example of the rich tradition of Australian landscape painting.
The primary basis of Australian culture up until the mid 20th century was Anglo Celtic, although distinctive Australian features had been evolving from the environment and indigenous culture. Over the past 50 years, Australian culture has been strongly influenced by American popular culture (particularly television and cinema), large scale immigration from non English speaking countries, and Australia's Asian neighbours. The vigour and originality of the arts in Australia films, opera, music, painting, theater, dance, and crafts are achieving international recognition.
Australia has a long history of visual arts, starting with the cave and bark paintings of its indigenous peoples. From the time of European settlement, a common theme in Australian art has been the Australian landscape, seen in the works of Arthur Streeton, Arthur Boyd and Albert Namatjira, among others. The traditions of indigenous Australians are largely transmitted orally and are closely tied to ceremony and the telling of the stories of the Dreamtime. Australian Aboriginal music, dance and art have a palpable influence on contemporary Australian visual and performing arts. Australia has an active tradition of music, ballet and theatre many of its performing arts companies receive public funding through the federal government's Australia Council. There is a symphony orchestra in each capital city, and a national opera company, Opera Australia, first made prominent by the renowned diva Dame Joan Sutherland Australian music includes classical, jazz, and many popular music genres.
Australian literature has also been influenced by the landscape the works of writers such as Banjo Paterson and Henry Lawson captured the experience of the Australian bush. The character of colonial Australia, as embodied in early literature, resonates with modern Australia and its perceived emphasis on egalitarianism, mateship, and anti authoritarianism. In 1973, Patrick White was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, the only Australian to have achieved this he is recognised as one of the great English language writers of the 20th century. Australian English is a major variety of the language its grammar and spelling are largely based on those of British English, overlaid with a rich vernacular of unique lexical items and phrases, some of which have found their way into standard English.
Australia has two public broadcasters (the ABC and SBS), three commercial television networks, three pay TV services, and numerous public, non profit television and radio stations. Australia's film industry has achieved critical and commercial successes. Each major city has daily newspapers, and there are two national daily newspapers, ''The Australian'' and ''The Australian Financial Review''. According to Reporters Without Borders in 2005, Australia is in 31st position on a list of countries ranked by press freedom, behind New Zealand (9th) and the United Kingdom (28th) but ahead of the United States. This ranking is primarily due to the limited diversity of commercial media ownership in Australia. Most Australian print media in particular is under the control of either News Corporation or John Fairfax Holdings.
was developed in Melbourne, Australia and is played at amateur and professional levels.
Sport is an important part of Australian culture, assisted by a climate that favours outdoor activities 23.5 Australians over the age of 15 regularly participate in organised sporting activities. At an international level, Australia has particularly strong teams in cricket, hockey, netball, rugby league, rugby union, and performs well in cycling and swimming. Australia has participated in every summer Olympic Games of the modern era, and every Commonwealth Games. Australia has hosted the 1956 and 2000 Summer Olympics, and has ranked among the top five medal takers since 2000. In 2004, it collected 49 Olympic medals (17 gold, 16 silver and 16 bronze). Australia has also hosted the 1938, 1962 and 1982 Commonwealth Games, and will host the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne. Australian rules football is the most popular national sport players gain some international prominence through International Rules which is an annual meeting between the Australian code and Irish Gaelic Football. However, Rugby League is more popular than Australian Rules in New South Wales and Queensland. The Australian Open is one of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments, held in Melbourne each January. The F1 Australian Grand Prix is also held in Melbourne, usually towards the end of March each year. Corporate and government sponsorship of many sports and lite athletes is common in Australia.
Televised sport is popular some of the highest rating television programs include the summer Olympic Games and the grand finals of local and international football competitions.
See also
References
! This article uses Wikipedia:Footnote3 please add references using that system and adjust the other references as necessary
div style "font size: 90 "
Sidney J. Baker, ''The Australian Language'', second edition, 1966.
Gillespie, R. (2002). Dating the first Australians. ''Radiocarbon'' 44:455 472
Smith, L. (1980), The Aboriginal Population of Australia, Australian National University Press, Canberra
Tatz, C. (1999). '''', AIATSIS Research Discussion Papers No 8, Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, Canberra
Windschuttle, K. (2001). '''', The New Criterion Vol. 20, No. 1, September 20.
Sheehan, P. (2002). '''', The Sydney Morning Herald, November 25.
Bean, C. Ed. (1941). , First World War Official Histories 11th Edition.
Australian Electoral Commission (2000).
Parliamentary Library (1997).
Australian Government. (2005).
Department of the Environment and Heritage.
Macfarlane, I. J. (1998). . ''Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin'', October
Parham, D. (2002). . ''Conference of Economists'', Adelaide, 1 October
Australian Bureau of Statistics. Labour Force Australia. Cat 6202
Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (2003). ''Advancing the National Interest'',
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affiars. (2005). br
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2001 Census,
Parliament of Australia, Senate (2005).
Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affiars. (1995).
, National Church Life Survey, Media release, 28 February 2004
Australian Film Commission. What are Australians Watching?,
div
External links
(Google Maps)
! featured artcicle indicator
! categories
Category:Continents
Category:Members of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category:Monarchies
Category:1901 establishments
! The below are interlanguage links.
af:Australi
ar:
an:Australia
bg:
bs:Australija
zh min nan:Australia
bn:
ca:Austr lia
ceb:Australia
cs:Austr lie
cy:Awstralia
da:Australien
de:Australien
et:Austraalia
el:
es:Australia
eo:A stralio
fa:
fr:Australie
ga:An Astr il
gl:Australia
hr:Australija
ko:
hi:
io:Australia
id:Australia
ia:Australia
is: stral a
it:Australia
he:
kw:Ostrali
la:Australia
lv:Austr lija (valsts)
lt:Australija
lb:Australien
li:Australi
hu:Ausztr lia
mi:Ahitereiria
ms:Australia
na:Otereiriya
nl:Australi (land)
nds:Australien
ja:
ko:
no:Australia
nn:Australia
pl:Australia
pt:Austr lia
ro:Australia
ru:
scn:Australia
simple:Australia
sk:Austr lia ( t t)
sl:Avstralija
sr:
fi:Australia
sv:Australien
ta:
tl:Australia
th:
vi: c
tpi:Ostrelia
tr:Avustralya
uk: ( )
yi:
zh:
border 1 align right cellpadding 4 cellspacing 0 width 300 style "margin: 0 0 1em 1em background: f9f9f9 border: 1px aaaaaa solid border collapse: collapse font size: 95 "
big'''Amerika SamoabrAmerican Samoa''' big
style "background: efefef " align "center" colspan "2"
border "0" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px" (Flag)
align "center" width "140px" (Coat of Arms)
align center style "vertical align: top " colspan 2 small''National motto: Samoa, Muamua Le Atua (Samoa, Let God Be First)'' small
align center colspan 2 style "background: ffffff "
'''Official languages'''
Samoan, English
'''Capital''' Fagatogo (constitutional and ''de facto'' seat of government) executive offices are located in Utulei
'''Governor'''
Togiola Tulafono
'''Area'''br Total br water
Ranked 226th br 199 km (76.8sq.mi) br 0
'''Population'''
br Total (2003)
br Density
Ranked 203rd
br 70,260
br 353 km (914 sq.mi)
'''Currency''' USD
'''Time zone''' UTC 11 (no DST)
'''National anthem''' Amerika Samoa
'''Internet TLD''' .as
'''Calling Code'''
1 684
style "background: efefef " align "center" colspan "2" Fatu Rock (right) and Futi Rock (left), islets on the reef of Tutuila at the entrance to Pago Pago Harbor (seen behind Fatu).
'''American Samoa''' (Samoan: '''Amerika Samoa''') is an unorganized, unincorporated territory of the United States located in the South Pacific Ocean southeast of the sovereign state of Samoa. The main (largest and most populous) island is Tutuila, with the Islands, Rose Atoll, and Swains Island also included in the territory. American Samoa is part of the Samoan Islands chain, located west of the Cook Islands, north of Tonga, and some 300 miles (500 km) south of Tokelau. To the west are the islands of the Wallis and Futuna group.
History
''Main article: History of Samoa, History of American Samoa''
Originally inhabited as early as 1000 BC, Samoa was not reached by European explorers until the 18th century.
International rivalries in the latter half of the 19th century were settled by an 1899 Treaty of Berlin in which Germany and the U.S. divided the Samoan archipelago. The U.S. formally occupied its portion a smaller group of eastern islands with the noted harbor of Pago Pago the following year. The western islands are now the independent state of Samoa.
After the U.S. took possession of American Samoa, the U.S. Navy built a coaling station on Pago Pago Bay for its Pacific Squadron and appointed a local Secretary. The navy secured a Deed of Cession of Tutuila in 1900 and a Deed of Cession of in 1904. The last sovereign of , the , was forced to sign a Deed of Cession of following a series of US Naval trials, known as the "Trial of the Ipu", in Pago Pago, , and aboard a Pacific Squadron gunboat.
During World War II, U.S. Marines in American Samoa outnumbered the local population, having a huge cultural influence. After the war, Organic Act 4500, a U.S. Department of Interior sponsored attempt to incorporate American Samoa, was defeated in Congress, primarily through the efforts of American Samoan chiefs, led by Tuiasosopo Mariota. These chiefs' efforts led to the creation of a local legislature, the American Samoa ''Fono,'' which meets in the village of Fagatogo, the territory's ''de facto'' and ''de jure'' capital. (See the Trivia section below for more information on Fagatogo.)
In time, the Navy appointed governor was replaced by a locally elected one. Although technically considered "unorganized" in that the U.S. Congress has not passed an Organic Act for the territory, American Samoa is self governing under a constitution that became effective on July 1, 1967. The U.S. Territory of American Samoa is on the United Nations list of Non Self Governing Territories, a listing which is disputed by territorial government officials.
Administrative Divisions
American Samoa is administratively divided into 3 districts and 2 "unorganized" islands. These districts are subdivided into 73 villages.
Districts:
Eastern
Western
Manu'a
Unorganized Islands:
Rose Island
Swains Island
br clear "left"
The villages for Eastern and Western districts are:
table border 0tr valign top
td
ol
liAasu
liAfao
liAfono
liAgugulu
liAlao
liAlofau
liAloga
liAmaluia
liAmanave
liAmaua
liAmouli
liAnua
liAoa
liAoloau
liAsili
liAtu'u
liAua
liAuasi
liAumi
liAunu'u
liAuto
liAvaio
liFaga'alu
liFaga'itau
liFagaili'i
liFagamalo
liFaganeanea
liFagasa
liFagatogo
liFailolo
liFalenin
liFatumafuti
ol
td
td
ol start 33
liFutiga
liIli'ili
liLeloaloa
liLeone
liLeuli'i
liMalaeimi
liMalaeloa Aitulagi
liMalaeloa Ituau
liMaloata
liMapusagafou
liMasausi
liMasefau
liMatu'u
liMesespa
liNu'uuli
liNua
liOnenoa
liPago Pago
liPava'ia'i
liPoloa
liSa'ilele
liSe'etaga
liTafuna
liTaputimu
liTula
liUtulei
liUtumea East
liUtumea West
liVailoatai
liVaitogi
liVatia
ol
td
td
td
tr
table
The villages for the Manu'a district are:
Faleasao
Leusoali'i
Luma
Maia
Ofu
Olosega
Si'ufaga
Sili
There is one village on Swains Island. Rose Island is an uninhabited wildlife refuge.
Trivia
American Samoa is the location of Rose Atoll, the southernmost point in the United States (if insular areas and territories are included) see extreme points for more information).
About 30 ethnic Samoans, many from American Samoa, currently play in the National Football League. A 2002 article from estimated that a Samoan male (either an American Samoan, or a Samoan living in the 50 United States) is 40 times more likely to play in the NFL than a non Samoan American. A number have also ventured into professional wrestling (see especially Anoai wrestling family).
Persons born in American Samoa are United States nationals, but not United States citizens. This is the only circumstance under which an individual would be one and not the other.
The American Samoa national soccer team holds an unwanted world record in international soccer the record defeat in an international match, a 31 0 crushing by Australia on April 11, 2001.
Although many respected reference sources list the neighboring village of Pago Pago as the capital, Fagatogo is the ''de facto'' and ''de jure'' (i.e., constitutionally designated cf. Article 5, Section 9) seat of government. Additionally, the governor's office is located in the village of Utulei, located on the opposite side of Fagatogo from Pago Pago. The reason why many sources list Pago Pago is because the name Pago Pago, the most popular port of call in American Samoa, has become associated with the harbor itself thus Pago Pago is now generally applied to the harbor area and the capital. However, both the port itself and the legislature of American Samoa known as the Fono are located in Fagatogo, a village that is adjacent to (and for all practical purposes indistinguishable from) Pago Pago. (Cf. Wikipedia entry for Pago Pago.)
In March of 1889, a German naval force shelled a village in Samoa, and by doing so destroyed some American property. Three American warships then entered the Samoan harbor and were prepared to fire on the three German warships found there. Before guns were fired, a hurricane blew up and sank all the ships, American and German. A compulsory armistice was called because of the lack of warships.
See also
Scouting in American Samoa
Government
List of American Samoa Governors
Elections in American Samoa
Sports
American Samoa at the 2000 Summer Olympics
American Samoa national rugby league team
American Samoa national soccer team
CIA Factbook Data
''From the CIA World Factbook 2000:''
Geography of American Samoa
Demographics of American Samoa
Politics of American Samoa
Economy of American Samoa
Communications in American Samoa
Transportation in American Samoa
Military: Defense is the responsibility of the US
External links
CIA's Factbook on American Samoa
, article in "Sovereignty Matters", ed. Joanne Barker, University of Nebraska Press, 2005.
Essay which looks at the history of the territory from ancient to more modern times.
Library of Congress resource which provides links to resources on American Samoa.
Map showing the basic layout of American Samoa.
Provides the text of the constition of American Samoa.
Lists information on the territorial government including officials and recent legislation.
Online United Nations Decolonization Documents including current and past Working Papers on American Samoa
An online community for Samoans. Features include forums, chat, blogs, etc.
List of rulers for American Samoa
Category:Insular areas of the United States
Category:Oceanic dependencies
zh min nan:B kok Samoa
ca:Samoa Nord americana
da:Amerikansk Samoa
de:Amerikanisch Samoa
et:Ameerika Samoa
es:Samoa Americana
eo:Usona Samoo
fr:Samoa am ricaines
ko:
id:Samoa Amerika
is:Bandar ska Sam a
it:Samoa Americane
he:
lv:Austrumsamoa
lt:Amerikos Samoa
hu:Amerikai Szamoa
mk:
ms:Samoa Amerika
nl:Amerikaans Samoa
ja:
no:Amerikansk Samoa
nn:Amerikansk Samoa
pl:Samoa Ameryka skie
pt:Samoa Americana
ru:
sm:Amerika Samoa
simple:American Samoa
sk:Americk Samoa
sl:Ameri ka Samoa
fi:Amerikan Samoa
sv:Amerikanska Samoa
tr:Amerikan Samoas
uk:
zh:
'''Alien''' or '''Aliens''' may mean:
Extraterrestrial life, in scientific context
Extraterrestrial life in culture
''Alien'' (film) (1979), by Ridley Scott
''Aliens'' (1986 film), the sequel to the above film
xenomorph, the alien creatures from the ''Alien'' movies
Aliens (comic), a group of comic book series
Alien (biology), a non native species
Alien (computing), a program that converts between different Linux package distribution file formats
Alien (law), a person who is neither a native nor a citizen of their country of residence
Alien (signifier), use in literature and criticism as the embodiment of an outside perspective or the sense of the other
The Aliens, Roky Erickson's backing band
Alien (game), a 1982 DOS text adventure
de:Alien
es:Alien
fr:Alien
ja:
nl:Buitenaards wezen
pl:obcy
pt:Alien gena
fi:Alien
zh:
An '''astronomer''' or '''astrophysicist''' is a person whose area of interest is astronomy or astrophysics.
was famed for his work on sunspots, and being the first to study the surface of the moon.
Astronomy is generally thought to have begun in ancient Babylon by the Persian Zoroastrian priests (the ''magi''). Recent studies of Babylonian records have shown them to be extremely accurate for the ancient night sky. Following the Babylonians, the Egyptians also had an emphasis on observations of the sky.
Mixtures of religious interpretations of the sky and the development of complex models for applying these interpretations, led to a duality that we now identify as astrology. It is important to recognize that before about 1750, there was no distinction between astrology and astronomy.
Astronomers, unlike most scientists, cannot interact with the objects that they study. They instead must resort to detailed observation in order to make discoveries. Generally, astronomers use telescopes or other imaging equipment to make such observations. The job itself is involved with travel to remote locations to study as well.
Famous astronomers
border
!Astronomer
!Contribution
Hipparchus and Ptolemy
Determined the positions of about 1,000 bright stars, tried to explain the puzzles of astronomy without refuting only believed geocentric model of universe and classified stars by magnitude.
Aristarchus of Samos
First known person to propound the heliocentric model of universe
Nasir al Din al Tusi
This Persian astronomer gave the first extant exposition of the whole system of plane and spherical trigonometry. Made very accurate tables of planetary movements and named many stars. His planetary system was the most advanced of his period and was used extensively until the development of the heliocentric model. Tusi couple resolves linear motion into the sum of two circular motions. He also calculated the value of 51' for the precession of the equinoxes and contributed to construction and usage of astrolabe.
Nicolaus Copernicus
Was influential in reintroducing the concept of Heliocentrism in modern times.
Tycho Brahe
Did develop many important astronomical instruments, and was the first to do accurate repeatable measurments of the heavens. The measurements of the orbit of Mars were very important to the development of astronomy.
Johannes Kepler
Suggested the elliptical orbits of planets, and propounded his ''Laws of Planetary Motion''.
Galileo Galilei
Was the first to use the telescope to observe the sky. Condemned to house arrest for his discoveries by Inquisitional edict, which was lifted 359 years later by Pope John Paul II.
Isaac Newton
Published ''Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica'' (1687), containing the "Newton's laws of motion", which are fundamental to mechanical physics, and which explained Kepler's laws of planetary motion. Predicted the orbits of the planets.
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
Extensive work on the internal mechanisms of stars, particularly known for determining the effect of special relativity on stars, including being the first to calculate the Chandrasekhar limit, which he did, without a calculator, on a boat journey.
Henrietta Swan Leavitt
Catalogued Cepheid variable stars in the Magellanic Clouds, in 1912 discovered the relationship between luminosty and periodicity in Cepheids leading to Hertzprung's later work.
Ejnar Hertzsprung
determined the distance to several Cepheids, when Cepheids were detected in other galaxies such as the Andromeda galaxy, the distance to those galaxies could then be determined.
Edwin Hubble
Discovered the expansion of the universe. (Hubble's Law) The Hubble Orbiting Space Telescope was named in his honor.
See also
Amateur astronomy
List of astronomers
There is also a well known painting by Johannes Vermeer titled ''The Astronomer'', which is often linked to Vermeer's ''The Geographer''. These paintings are both thought to represent the growing influence and rise in prominence of scientific inquiry in Europe at the time of their painting, 1668 69.
Category:Science occupations
als:Astronom
bg:
da:Astronom
de:Astronom
eo:Astronomo
ko:
it:Astronomo
hu:Csillag sz
nl:Astronoom
ja:
no:Astronom
nn:Astronom
pl:Astronom
simple:Astronomer
sk:Astron m
sl:Astronom
fi:T htitieteilij
th:
zh:
REDIRECT Amoeboid
'''Amoeboids''' are cells that move or feed by means of temporary projections, called pseudopods (false feet). They have appeared in a number of different groups. Some cells in multicellular animals may be amoeboid, for instance our white blood cells, which consume pathogens. Many protists exist as individual amoeboid cells, or take such a form at some point in their life cycle. The most famous such organism is ''Amoeba proteus'' the name amoebae is variously used to describe its close relatives, other organisms similar to it, or the amoeboids in general.
Amoeboids may be divided into several morphological categories based on the form and structure of the pseudopods. Those where the pseudopods are supported by regular arrays of microtubules are called actinopods, and forms where they are not are called rhizopods, further divided into lobse, filose, and reticulose amoebae. There is also a strange group of giant marine amoeboids, the xenophyophores, that do not fall into any of these categories.
Lobose pseudopods are blunt, and there may be one or several on a cell, which is usually divided into a layer of clear ectoplasm surrounding more granular endoplasm. Most, including ''Amoeba'' itself, move by the body mass flowing into an anterior pseudopod. The vast majority form a monophyletic group called the Amoebozoa, which also includes most slime moulds. A second group, the Percolozoa, includes protists that can transform between amoeboid and flagellate forms.
Filose pseudopods are narrow and tapering. The vast majority of filose amoebae, including all those that produce shells, are placed within the Cercozoa together with various flagellates that tend to have amoeboid forms. The naked filose amoebae comprise two other groups, the vampyrellids and nucleariids. The latter appear to be close relatives of animals and fungi.
Reticulose pseudopods are cytoplasmic strands that branch and merge to form a net. They are found most notably among the Foraminifera, a large group of marine protists that generally produce multi chambered shells. There are only a few sorts of naked reticulose amoeboids, notably the gymnophryids, and their relationships are not certain.
Actinopods are divided into the radiolaria and heliozoa. The radiolaria are mostly marine protists with complex internal skeletons, including central capsules that divide the cells into granular endoplasm and frothy ectoplasm that keeps them buoyant. The heliozoa include both freshwater and marine forms that use their axopods to capture small prey, and only have simple scales or spines for skeletal elements. Both groups appear to be polyphyletic.
Traditionally the amoeboid protozoa are grouped together as the Sarcodina, variously ranked from class to phylum, with each of the above categories as a formal subtaxon. However, since they are all based on form rather than phylogeny, newer systems generally separate some out or abandon them entirely. Most amoeboids are now included in two major supergroups the Amoebozoa, including most lobose amoebae and slime moulds, and the Rhizaria, including the Cercozoa, Foraminifera, radiolarian classes and certain heliozoa. However, amoeboids have appeared separately in many other groups, including various different lines of algae not listed above.
External links
website brings together information from published sources.
Category:ProtistaCategory:Cell biology Category:Motile cells
es:riz podo
fr:Actinopoda
pl:Ameby
'''ASCII''' ('''''A'''merican '''S'''tandard '''C'''ode for '''I'''nformation '''I'''nterchange''), generally pronounced , is a character encoding based on the English alphabet. ASCII codes represent text in computers, communications equipment, and other devices that work with text. Most modern character encodings have a historical basis in ASCII.
ASCII was first published as a standard in 1967 and was last updated in 1986. It currently defines codes for 33 non printing, mostly obsolete control characters that affect how text is processed, plus the following 95 printable characters (starting with the space character):
pre
!" ?
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
pre
Asteroid 3568 ASCII is named after the character encoding.
Overview
Like other character representation computer codes, ASCII specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and the symbols glyphs of a written language, thus allowing digital devices to communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate character oriented information. The ASCII character encodingrefInternational Organization for Standardization (December 1, 1975). "". ''Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Registry''. Alternate U.S. version: ". Accessed August 7, 2005. ref
ASCII is, strictly, a seven bit code, meaning that it uses the bit patterns representable with seven binary digits (a range of 0 to 127 decimal) to represent character information. At the time ASCII was introduced, many computers dealt with eight bit groups (bytes or, more specifically, octets) as the smallest unit of information the eighth bit was commonly used as a parity bit for error checking on communication lines or other device specific functions. Machines which did not use parity typically set the eighth bit to zero, though some systems such as Prime machines running PRIMOS set the eighth bit of ASCII characters to one.
ASCII only defines a relationship between specific characters and bit sequences aside from reserving a few control codes for line oriented formatting, it does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or appearance of text within a document. Such concepts are within the realm of other systems such as the markup languages.
History
ASCII developed from telegraphic codes and first entered commercial use as a seven bit teleprinter code promoted by Bell data services. The Bell System had previously planned to use a six bit code, derived from Fieldata, that added punctuation and lower case letters to the earlier five bit Baudot teleprinter code, but was persuaded instead to join the ASA subcommittee that had started to develop ASCII. Baudot helped in the automation of sending and receiving telegraphic messages, and took many features from Morse code however, unlike Morse code, Baudot used constant length codes. Compared to earlier telegraph codes, the proposed Bell code and ASCII both underwent re ordering for more convenient sorting (especially alphabetization) of lists, and added features for devices other than teleprinters. Bob Bemer introduced features such as the 'escape sequence'.
The American Standards Association (ASA, later to become ANSI) first published ASCII as a standard in 1963. ASCII 1963 lacked the lowercase letters, and had an up arrow () instead of the caret ( ) and a left arrow () instead of the underscore ( ). The 1967 version added the lowercase letters, changed the names of a few control characters and moved the two controls ACK and ESC from the lowercase letters area into the control codes area.
ASCII was subsequently updated and published as ANSI X3.4 1968, ANSI X3.4 1977, and finally, ANSI X3.4 1986.
Other international standards bodies have ratified character encodings that are identical or nearly identical to ASCII. These encodings are sometimes referred to as ASCII, even though ASCII is strictly defined only by the ASA ANSI standards:
The European Computer Manufacturers Association published editions of its ASCII clone, ECMA 6, in 1965, 1967, 1970, 1973, 1983, and 1991. The 1991 edition is the same as ANSI X3.4 1986.refECMA International (December 1991). Accessed December 17, 2005. ref
The International Organization for Standardization published its version, ISO 646 (later ISO IEC 646) in 1967, 1972, 1983, and 1991. ISO 646:1972, in particular, established a set of country specific versions with punctuation characters replaced with non English letters. ISO IEC 646:1991 International Reference Version is the same as ANSI X3.4 1986.
The International Telecommunication Union published its version of ANSI X3.4 1986, ITU T Recommendation T.50, in 1992. In the early 1970s, under the name CCITT, the same organization published a version as CCITT Recommendation V.3.
DIN published a version of ASCII as DIN 66003 in 1974.
The IETF published a version in 1969 as RFC 20, and established the Internet's standard version, based on ANSI X3.4 1986, with the publication of RFC 1345 in 1992.
IBM's version of ANSI X3.4 1986 is published in IBM technical literature as code page 367.
ASCII has also become embedded in its probable replacement, Unicode, as the 'lowest' 128 characters. Some observers consider ASCII the most "successful" software standard ever promulgated.
ASCII control characters
ASCII reserves the first 32 codes (numbers 0 31 decimal) for control characters: codes originally intended not to carry printable information, but rather to control devices (such as printers) that make use of ASCII. For example, character 10 represents the "line feed" function (which causes a printer to advance its paper), and character 27 represents the "escape" key often found in the top left corner of common keyboards.
Code 127 (all seven bits on), another special character, equates to "delete" or "rubout". Though its function resembles that of other control characters, the designers of ASCII used this pattern so that it could "erase" a section of paper tape (a popular storage medium until the 1980s) by punching all possible holes at a particular character position, thus effectively replacing any previous information. Since Code 0 (null,all bits off) was also ignored it was possible to leave gaps and then make corrections by blanking characters before or after the gap and then entering new characters in the gap.
Many of the ASCII control codes serve (or served) to mark data packets, or to control a data transmission protocol (e.g. ENQuiry effectively, "any stations out there?" , ACKnowledge, Negative AcKnowledge, Start Of Header, Start of TeXt, End of TeXt, etc). ESCape and SUBstitute permit a communications protocol to, for instance, mark binary data so that if it contains codes with the same pattern as a protocol character, the recipient will process the code as data.
The designers of ASCII intended the separator characters ("Record Separator", etc.) for use with magnetic tape systems.
Two of the device control characters, commonly interpreted as XON and XOFF, generally function as flow control characters to throttle data flow to a slow device (such as a printer) from a fast device (such as a computer) so data does not overrun and get lost.
Early users of ASCII adopted some of the control codes to represent "meta information" such as end of line, start end of a data element, and so on. These assignments often conflict, so part of the effort in converting data from one format to another involves making the correct meta information transformations. For example, the character(s) representing end of line ("newline") in text data files streams vary from operating system to operating system. When moving files from one system to another, the conversion process must recognize these characters as end of line markers and handle them appropriately.
Today, ASCII users use the control characters less and less with the exception of "carriage return" and or "line feed". Modern markup languages, modern communication protocols, the move from text based to graphical devices, and the demise of teleprinters, punch cards, and paper tapes have rendered most of the control characters obsolete.
class "wikitable" style "text align: center"
!style "width: 5.5em" Binary
!style "width: 2.5em" Oct
!style "width: 2.5em" Dec
!style "width: 2.5em" Hex
!style "width: 2.5em" Abbr
!style "width: 2.5em" PR
!style "width: 2.5em" CS
!Description
00000000
000
0
00
NUL
big big
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Null character
00000001
001
1
01
SOH
big big
A
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Start of Header
00000010
002
2
02
STX
big big
B
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Start of Text
00000011
003
3
03
ETX
big big
C
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" End of Text
00000100
004
4
04
EOT
big big
D
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" End of Transmission
00000101
005
5
05
ENQ
big big
E
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Enquiry
00000110
006
6
06
ACK
big big
F
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Acknowledgment
00000111
007
7
07
BEL
big big
G
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Bell
00001000
010
8
08
BS
big big
H
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Backspace
00001001
011
9
09
HT
big big
I
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Horizontal Tab
00001010
012
10
0A
LF
big big
J
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Line feed
00001011
013
11
0B
VT
big big
K
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Vertical Tab
00001100
014
12
0C
FF
big big
L
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Form feed
00001101
015
13
0D
CR
big big
M
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Carriage return
00001110
016
14
0E
SO
big big
N
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Shift Out
00001111
017
15
0F
SI
big big
O
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Shift In
00010000
020
16
10
DLE
big big
P
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Data Link Escape
00010001
021
17
11
DC1
big big
Q
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Device Control 1 (oft. XON)
00010010
022
18
12
DC2
big big
R
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Device Control 2
00010011
023
19
13
DC3
big big
S
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Device Control 3 (oft. XOFF)
00010100
024
20
14
DC4
big big
T
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Device Control 4
00010101
025
21
15
NAK
big big
U
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Negative Acknowledgement
00010110
026
22
16
SYN
big big
V
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Synchronous Idle
00010111
027
23
17
ETB
big big
W
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" End of Trans. Block
00011000
030
24
18
CAN
big big
X
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Cancel
00011001
031
25
19
EM
big big
Y
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" End of Medium
00011010
032
26
1A
SUB
big big
Z
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Substitute
00011011
033
27
1B
ESC
big big
nowiki nowiki
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Escape
00011100
034
28
1C
FS
big big
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" File Separator
00011101
035
29
1D
GS
big big
nowiki nowiki
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Group Separator
00011110
036
30
1E
RS
big big
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Record Separator
00011111
037
31
1F
US
big big
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Unit Separator
01111111
177
127
7F
DEL
big big
?
style "text align: left margin left: 0.2em" Delete
Printable Representation, the Unicode glyphs reserved for representing control characters when it is necessary to print or display them rather than have them perform their intended function.
Control key Sequence, the traditional key sequences for inputting control characters. The caret ( ) represents the "Control" or "Ctrl" key that must be held down while pressing the second key in the sequence. The caret key representation is also used by some software to represent control characters.
The Backspace character can also be entered by pressing the "Backspace", "Bksp", or key on some systems.
The Delete character can also be entered by pressing the "Delete" or "Del" key. It can also be entered by pressing the "Backspace", "Bksp", or key on some systems.
The Escape character can also be entered by pressing the "Escape" or "Esc" key on some systems.
The Carriage Return character can also be entered by pressing the "Return", "Ret", "Enter", or key on most systems.
The ambiguity surrounding the Backspace key comes from systems that translated the DEL control character into a BS (backspace) before transmitting it. Some software was unable to process the character and would display " H" instead. " H" persists in messages today as a deliberate humorous device, e.g. "there's a sucker H H H H H Hpotential customer born every minute". A less common variant of this involves the use of " W", which in some text editors means "delete previous word". The example sentence would therefore also work as "there's a sucker W potential customer born every minute".
ASCII printable characters
Code 32, the "space" character, denotes the space between words, as produced by the large space bar of a keyboard. Codes 33 to 126, known as the printable characters, represent letters, digits, punctuation marks, and a few miscellaneous symbols.
Seven bit ASCII provided seven "national" characters and, if the combined hardware and software permit, can use overstrikes to simulate some additional international characters: in such a scenario a backspace can precede a grave accent (which the American and British standards, but only those standards, also call "opening single quotation mark"), a tilde, or a breath mark (inverted vel).
valign "top"
class "wikitable" style "text align: center"
!style "width: 5.5em" Binary
!style "width: 2.5em" Dec
!style "width: 2.5em" Hex
!Glyph
00100000
32
20
(blank) ()
00100001
33
21
!
00100010
34
22
"
00100011
35
23
00100100
36
24
00100101
37
25
00100110
38
26
00100111
39
27
'
00101000
40
28
(
00101001
41
29
)
00101010
42
2A
00101011
43
2B
00101100
44
2C
,
00101101
45
2D
00101110
46
2E
.
00101111
47
2F
00110000
48
30
0
00110001
49
31
1
00110010
50
32
2
00110011
51
33
3
00110100
52
34
4
00110101
53
35
5
00110110
54
36
6
00110111
55
37
7
00111000
56
38
8
00111001
57
39
9
00111010
58
3A
:
00111011
59
3B
00111100
60
3C
00111101
61
3D
00111110
62
3E
00111111
63
3F
?
class "wikitable" style "text align: center"
valign "bottom"
!style "width: 5.5em" Bin
!style "width: 2.5em" Dec
!style "width: 2.5em" Hex
!Glyph
01000000
64
40
01000001
65
41
A
01000010
66
42
B
01000011
67
43
C
01000100
68
44
D
01000101
69
45
E
01000110
70
46
F
01000111
71
47
G
01001000
72
48
H
01001001
73
49
I
01001010
74
4A
J
01001011
75
4B
K
01001100
76
4C
L
01001101
77
4D
M
01001110
78
4E
N
01001111
79
4F
O
01010000
80
50
P
01010001
81
51
Q
01010010
82
52
R
01010011
83
53
S
01010100
84
54
T
01010101
85
55
U
01010110
86
56
V
01010111
87
57
W
01011000
88
58
X
01011001
89
59
Y
01011010
90
5A
Z
01011011
91
5B
nowiki nowiki
01011100
92
5C
01011101
93
5D
Bracket nowiki nowiki
01011110
94
5E
01011111
95
5F
class "wikitable" style "text align: center"
valign "bottom"
!style "width: 5.5em" Bin
!style "width: 2.5em" Dec
!style "width: 2.5em" Hex
!Glyph
01100000
96
60
01100001
97
61
a
01100010
98
62
b
01100011
99
63
c
01100100
100
64
d
01100101
101
65
e
01100110
102
66
f
01100111
103
67
g
01101000
104
68
h
01101001
105
69
i
01101010
106
6A
j
01101011
107
6B
k
01101100
108
6C
l
01101101
109
6D
m
01101110
110
6E
n
01101111
111
6F
o
01110000
112
70
p
01110001
113
71
q
01110010
114
72
r
01110011
115
73
s
01110100
116
74
t
01110101
117
75
u
01110110
118
76
v
01110111
119
77
w
01111000
120
78
x
01111001
121
79
y
01111010
122
7A
z
01111011
123
7B
nowiki nowiki
01111100
124
7C
01111101
125
7D
nowiki nowiki
01111110
126
7E
Structural features
The digits 0 9 are represented with their values in binary prefixed with 0011 (this means that bcd ASCII is simply a matter of taking each bcd nibble separately and prefixing 0011 to it.
Lowercase and uppercase letters only differ in bit pattern by a single bit simplifying case conversion to a range test (to avoid converting characters that are not letters) and a single bitwise operation.
Aliases for ASCII
RFC 1345 (published in June 1992) and the (ongoing), both recognize the following case insensitive aliases for ASCII as suitable for use on the Internet:
ANSI X3.4 1968 (canonical name)
ANSI X3.4 1986
ASCII
US ASCII (preferred MIME name)
us
ISO646 US
ISO 646.irv:1991
iso ir 6
IBM367
cp367
csASCII
Of these, only the aliases "US ASCII" and "ASCII" have achieved widespread use. One often finds them in the optional "charset" parameter in the Content Type header of some MIME messages, in the equivalent "meta" element of some HTML documents, and in the encoding declaration part of the prolog of some XML documents.
Variants of ASCII
As computer technology spread throughout the world, different standards bodies and corporations developed many variations of ASCII in order to facilitate the expression of non English languages that used Roman based alphabets. One could class some of these variations as "ASCII extensions", although some mis apply that term to cover all variants, including those that do not preserve ASCII's character map in the 7 bit range.
ISO 646 (1972), the first attempt to remedy the pro English language bias, created compatibility problems, since it remained a 7 bit character set. It made no additional codes available, so it reassigned some in language specific variants. It thus became impossible to know what character a code represented without knowing which variant to work with, and text processing systems could generally cope with only one variant anyway.
Eventually, improved technology brought out of band means to represent the information formerly encoded in the eighth bit of each byte, freeing this bit to add another 128 additional character codes for new assignments. For example, IBM developed 8 bit code pages, such as code page 437, which replaced the control characters with graphic symbols such as smiley faces, and mapped additional graphic characters to the upper 128 bytes. Operating systems such as DOS supported these code pages, and manufacturers of IBM PCs supported them in hardware.
Eight bit standards such as ISO IEC 8859 and Mac OS Roman developed as true extensions of ASCII, leaving the original character mapping intact and just adding additional values above the 7 bit range. This enabled the representation of a broader range of languages, but these standards continued to suffer from incompatibilities and limitations. Still, ISO 8859 1 its variant Windows 1252 (often mislabeled as ISO 8859 1) and original 7 bit ASCII remain the most common character encodings in use today.
Unicode and the ISO IEC 10646 Universal Character Set (UCS) have a much wider array of characters, and their various encoding forms have begun to supplant ISO IEC 8859 and ASCII rapidly in many environments. While ASCII basically uses 7 bit codes, Unicode and the UCS use relatively abstract "code points": non negative integer numbers that map, using different encoding forms and schemes, to sequences of one or more 8 bit bytes. To permit backward compatibility, Unicode and the UCS assign the first 128 code points to the same characters as ASCII. One can therefore think of ASCII as a 7 bit encoding scheme for a very small subset of Unicode and of the UCS. The popular UTF 8 encoding form prescribes the use of one to four 8 bit code values for each code point character, and equates exactly to ASCII for the code values below 128. Other encoding forms such as UTF 16 resemble ASCII in how they represent the first 128 characters of Unicode, but tend to use 16 or 32 bits per character, so they require conversion for compatibility.
The blend word ''ASCIIbetical'' has evolved to describe the collation of data in ASCII code order rather than "standard" alphabetical order.refJargon File. . Accessed December 17, 2005. ref
The abbreviation ASCIIZ or ASCIZ refers to a null terminated ASCII string.
See also
ANSI
ASCII art
ASCII games
Text file
Bob Bemer
EBCDIC
Unicode
ASCII ribbon
ASCII extensions
(where all ASCII printable characters are identical to ASCII)
Extended ASCII
UTF 8
ISO 8859
ISCII
VISCII
Windows code pages
ASCII variants
(where some ASCII printable characters have been replaced)
ISO 646
ATASCII
PETSCII
ZX Spectrum character set
References
For specific points
references
General
Tom Jennings (October 29 2004). Accessed December 17 2005.
Alt codes
External links
! , a FOSS Application for Microsoft Windows inserts any character with one click. not relevant to this page User:Chris Chittleborough, 8 February 2006
! good info but i'd like something more authoritive than a random personal website if at all possible Plugwash 23:14, 25 December 2005 (UTC)
! i think this can stay at least for now it doesn't seem to contain misinformation about what ASCII is or extended ASCII though there is a small issue with its "IBM PC Extended ASCII" section (its only correct for English versions and sometimes not even for those) Plugwash 23:14, 25 December 2005 (UTC)
! note: this website originally started as a school project, I wanted to make something to help the other students in the class and I think it may really help others. I intend to stand behind this work and if you find any error please don't hesitate to notify me of them. user:paulschou
Category:5 letter acronyms
Category:Character encoding
Category:Character sets
Category:Latin alphabet representations
als:ASCII
ar:ASCII
ast:ASCII
bg:ASCII
ca:ASCII
cs:ASCII
da:ASCII
de:ASCII
el:ASCII
eo:Askio
es:ASCII
fi:ASCII
fr:American Standard Code for Information Interchange
gl:ASCII
he:ASCII
hu:ASCII
ia:ASCII
id:ASCII
it:ASCII
ja:American Standard Code for Information Interchange
ko:ASCII
ku:ASCII
lv:ASCII
ms:ASCII
nl:ASCII (tekenset)
nn:ASCII
no:ASCII
pl:ASCII
pt:ASCII
ro:ASCII
ru:ASCII
sk:ASCII
sl:ASCII
sq:ASCII
sr:ASCII
sv:ASCII
th:ASCII
tr:ASCII
uk:ASCII
vi:ASCII
zh:ASCII
zh min nan:ASCII
'''America''' is usually meant as either:
The Americas, the lands between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, usually subdivided into:
North America
South America
The United States of America
''See also: Americas (terminology), Use of the word America, and Use of the word American''
America is also:
America, Netherlands in Limburg
America, a part of the parish of Sutton in the Isle in Cambridgeshire, England
America is the title or name of:br
''Entertainment:''
"Am rica", a song by Spanish singer and composer Jos Luis Perales
"America", a song by Simon and Garfunkel
"America", a song by Prince
"America", a song by Neil Diamond
America (band), a rock and roll band
''America'', the title of their debut album
''America'', an album by the band Havalina
''America'', a 1924 film directed by D.W. Griffith
''America (The Book)'', a book written by the staff of ''The Daily Show with Jon Stewart''
''America'', a book by Jean Baudrillard examining the nation sociologically
"America", a song from West Side Story by Leonard Bernstein, also performed by the UK rock group The Nice
America (XM), XM Satellite Radio channel 10
''Am rica'', a Brazilian telenovela (soap opera).
America (television station), an Argentinian television station
''America'', a weekly Roman Catholic magazine
''Sports:''
Club America, Mexican football (soccer) team
Am rica de Cali, a Colombian football (soccer) team
''America'', a racing yacht that won the first ever America's Cup in 1851
''Transportation:''
''America'', a multi engine airplane used by Richard E. Byrd and his crew on a 1927 transatlantic flight
''America'', a passenger liner commanded by George Fried involved in a famous sea rescue in 1929
USS ''America'', the name of three United States Navy ships
''SS America'', a passenger liner owned by the United States Lines.
America is an alternative title for:
"My Country, 'Tis of Thee", a patriotic song of the United States
Our America, an essay by Jose Marti
See also
Amerika (disambiguation)
Naming of America
! interwiki
cy:America
de:Amerika
fr:America
hr:Amerika
nl:Amerika
ja: ( )
no:Amerika (andre betydninger)
pt:Am rica (desambigua o)
sq:America
sr:
fi:Amerikka
tr:Amerika
'''Africa''' is the world's second largest and second most populous continent, after Asia. At about 30,370,000 km (11,730,000 sq mi) including its adjacent islands, it covers 5.9 of the Earth's total surface area, and 20.3 of the total land area. With over 840,000,000 people (as of 2005) in 61 territories, it accounts for more than 12 of the world's human population.
Etymology
The name '''Africa''' came into Western use through the Romans, who used the name ''Africa terra'' "land of the Afri" (plural, or "Afer" singular) for the northern part of the continent, as the province of Africa with its capital Carthage, corresponding to modern day Tunisia.
The Afri were a tribe possibly Berber who dwelt in North Africa in the Carthage area. The origin of ''Afer'' may be connected with Phoenician '' afar'', dust (also found in most other Semitic languages) some other etymologies that have been postulated for the ancient name 'Africa' that are much more debatable include:
: the Latin word ''aprica'', meaning "sunny"
: the Greek word ''aphrike'', meaning "without cold" (see also List of traditional Greek place names). The historian Leo Africanus (1495 1554) attributed the origin to the Greek word ''phrike'' ( , meaning "cold and horror"), combined with the negating prefix a , so meaning a land free of cold and horror. However, the change of sound from ''ph'' to ''f'' in Greek is datable to about the first century, so this is unlikely to be the origin.
Ancient Africa extended into what is now known as Asia. There was no line drawn between the two continents until the geographer Ptolemy (85 165 AD), accepted Alexandria as Prime Meridian and made the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa. As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent, the idea of ''Africa'' expanded with their knowledge.
Geography
''Main article: Geography of Africa''
picture, with Antarctica to the south, and the Sahara and Arabian peninsula at the top of the globe
Africa is the largest of the three great southward projections from the main mass of the Earth's surface. It includes within its remarkably regular outline an area, of c. 30,360,288 km (11,722,173 mi), including the islands.
Separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, it is joined to Asia at its northeast extremity by the Isthmus of Suez (transected by the Suez Canal), 130 km (80 miles) wide. (Geopolitically, Egypt's Sinai Peninsula east of the Suez Canal is often considered part of Africa, as well.) From the most northerly point, Cape Blanc (Ra s al Abyad) in Tunisia (3721 N), to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas in South Africa (345115 S), is a distance approximately of 8,000 km (5,000 miles) from Cape Verde, 173322 W, the westernmost point, to Ras Hafun in Somalia, 512752 E, the most easterly projection, is a distance (also approximately) of 7,400 km (4,600 miles). The length of coast line is 26,000 km (16,100 miles) and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is shown by the fact that Europe, which covers only 9,700,000 km (3,760,000 square miles), has a coast line of 32,000 km (19,800 miles).
The main structural lines of the continent show both the east to west direction characteristic, at least in the eastern hemisphere, of the more northern parts of the world, and the north to south direction seen in the southern peninsulas. Africa is thus composed of two segments at right angles, the northern running from east to west, the southern from north to south, the subordinate lines corresponding in the main to these two directions.
History
''Main article: History of Africa''
Africa is home to the oldest inhabited territory on earth, with the human race originating from this continent. During the mid 20th century, anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as 7 million years ago. Fossil remains of several species of early ape like humans thought to have evolved into modern day man, such as ''Australopithecus afarensis'' (radiometrically dated to 3.9 3.0 million years BC), ''Paranthropus boisei'' (2.3 1.4 million BC) and ''Homo ergaster'' (c. 600,000 1.9 million BC) has been discovered.
The Ishango Bone, dated to c. 25,000 years ago, shows tallies in mathematical notation. Throughout humanity's prehistory, Africa (like all other continents) had no nation states, and was instead inhabited by groups of hunter gatherers such as the Khoi and San (formerly known as bushmen).
Around 3300 BC, the historical record opens in Africa with the rise of literacy in Egypt, which continued with varying levels of influence over other areas until 343 BC. Other prominent civilizations include Ethiopia, the Nubian kingdom, Carthage, the kingdoms of the Sahel (Ghana, Mali, and Songhai) and Great Zimbabwe.
In 1482, the Portuguese established the first of many trading stations along the Guinea coast at Elmina. The chief commodities dealt in were slaves, gold, ivory and spices. The European discovery of America in 1492 was followed by a great development of the slave trade, which, before the Portuguese era, had been an overland trade almost exclusively, and never confined to any one continent.
But at the same time that slavery was ending in Europe, in the early 19th century the European imperial powers staged a massive "scramble for Africa" and occupied most of the continent, creating many colonial nation states, and leaving only two independent nations: Liberia, the Black American colony, and Ethiopia. This occupation continued until after the conclusion of the Second World War, when all colonial states gradually obtained formal independence.
Today, Africa is home to over 50 independent countries, all but 2 of which still have the borders drawn up during the era of European colonialism.
Politics
''
Precolonial Africa
Colonial Africa
Colonialism had a destabilizing effect on what had been a number of ethnic groups that is still being felt in African politics. Prior to European influence, national borders were not much of a concern, with Africans generally following the practice of other areas of the world, such as the Arabian peninsula, where a group's territory was congruent with its military or trade influence. The European insistence of drawing borders around territories to isolate them from those of other colonial powers often had the effect of separating otherwise contiguous political groups, or forcing traditional enemies to live side by side with no buffer between them. For example, the Congo River, although it appears to be a natural geographic boundary, had groups that otherwise shared a language, culture or other similarity who resided on both sides. The division of the land between Belgium and France along the river isolated these groups from each other. Those who lived in Saharan or Sub Saharan Africa and traded across the continent for centuries often found themselves crossing "borders" that existed only on European maps.
In nations that had substantial European populations, for example Rhodesia and South Africa, systems of second class citizenship were often set up in order to give Europeans political power far in excess of their numbers. However, the lines were not often drawn strictly across racial lines. In Liberia, the citizens who were descendants of American slaves managed to have a political system for over 100 years that gave ex slaves and natives to the area roughly equal legislative power despite the fact the ex slaves were outnumbered ten to one in the general population. The inspiration for this system was the United States Senate, which had balanced the power of free and slave states despite the much larger population of the former.
Europeans often changed the balance of power, created ethnic divides where they did not previously exist, and introduced a cultural dichotomy detrimental to the native inhabitants in the areas they controlled. For example, in what is now Rwanda and Burundi, two ethnic groups Hutus and Tutsis had merged into one culture by the time Belgian colonists had taken control of the region in the 19th century. No longer divided by ethnicity as intermingling, inter marriage, and merging of cultural practices over the centuries had long since erased visible signs of a culture divide, the Belgians instituted a policy of racial categorization, upon taking control of the region, as racial based categorization and philosophies was a fixture of the European culture of that time. The term Hutu originally referred to the agricultural based Bantu speaking tribes that moved into present day Rwandan and Burundi from the West, and the term Tutsi referred to North Eastern cattle based tribes that migrated into the region later. The terms to the indigenous peoples eventually came to describe a person's economic class. Those individuals who owned roughly 10 or more cattle were considered Tutsi, and those with fewer were considered Hutu, regardless of ancestral history. This was not a strict line but a general rule of thumb, and one could move from Hutu to Tutsi and vice versa.
The Belgians introduced a racialised system. Those individuals who had characteristics the Europeans admired fairer skin, ample height, narrow noses, etc. were given power amongst the colonized peoples. The Belgians determined these features were more ideally Hamitic, Hamitic in turn being more ideally European and belonged to those people closest to Tutsi in ancestry. They instituted a policy of issuing identity cards based on this philosophy. Those closest to this ideal were proclaimed Tutsi and those not were proclaimed Hutu.
Post colonial Africa
Since independence, African states have frequently been hampered by instability, corruption, violence, and authoritarianism. The vast majority of African nations are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule. Few nations in Africa have been able to sustain democratic governments, instead cycling through a series of brutal coups and military dictatorships.
A number of Africa's post colonial political leaders were poorly educated and ignorant on matters of governance great instability, however, was mainly the result of marginalization of other ethnic groups and graft under these leaders.
As well, many used the positions of power to ignite ethnic conflicts that had been exacerbated, or even created, under colonial rule. In many countries, the military was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order and ruled most nations in Africa during the 70s and early 80s.
During the period from the early 1960s to the late 1980s Africa had over 70 coups and 13 presidential assassinations.
Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union also played a role in the instability. When a country became independent for the first time, it was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers. Many countries in Northern Africa received Soviet military aid, while many in Central and Southern Africa were supported by the United States and or France. The 1970s saw an escalation as newly independent Angola and Mozambique aligned themselves with the Soviet Union and the West and South Africa sought to contain Soviet influence.
Border and territorial disputes have also been common, with the European imposed borders of many nations being widely contested through armed conflicts.
Failed government policies and political corruption have also resulted in many widespread famines, and significant portions of Africa remain with distribution systems unable to disseminate enough food or water for the population to survive. The spread of disease is also rampant, especially the spread of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and the associated Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), which has become a deadly epidemic on the continent.
Despite numerous hardships, there have been some signs the continent has hope for the future. Democratic governments seem to be spreading, though are not yet the majority (National Geographic claims 13 African nations can be considered truly democratic). As well, many nations have at least nominally recognized basic human rights for all citizens, though in practice these are not always recognized, and have created reasonably independent judiciaries.
There are clear signs of increased networking among African organisations and states. In the civil war in the Democratic Republic of Congo (former Zaire), rather than rich, non African countries intervening, about half a dozen neighbouring African countries got involved (see also Second Congo War). The death toll has been estimated by some to be 3.5 million since the conflict began in 1998. This might play a role similar to that of World War II for Europe, after which the people in the neighbouring countries decide to integrate their societies in such a way that war between them becomes as unthinkable as a war between, say, France and Germany would be today.
Political associations such as the African Union are also offering hope for greater co operation and peace between the continent's many countries.
Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state. Most of such violations occur for political reasons, often times as a 'side effect' of civil war. Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, and C te d'Ivoire.
Modern Africa
Most western countries place limitations on aid to African nations, especially the United States. These limitations are often used to control the governments of these African nations as a result, these nations are turning to non traditional sources of financial aid. China has increasingly provided financial aid to Africa in order to secure contracts on natural resources, such as oil, gold, and diamonds. There usually is no political prescription. Countries the Chinese are investing in include:
Central African Republic (plantations), Nigeria (oil gas), Sierra Leone (tourism), Gabon (oil), Congo Brazzaville (oil wood industry), Congo (copper cobalt), Angola (railroad system), Libya (oil), Sudan (oil), Uganda (coffee fishing industry), Kenya (communications network), Rwanda (public works), Burundi (Nickel), Zimbabwe (infrastructure), South Africa (coal gold).
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Africa''
Africa is the world's poorest inhabited continent: the United Nations' 2003 (of 175 countries) found that positions 151 (Gambia) to 175 (Sierra Leone) were taken up entirely by African nations.
It has had (and in some ways is still having) a shaky and uncertain transition from colonialism, with increases in corruption and despotism being major contributing factors to its poor economic situation. While rapid growth in China and now India, and moderate growth in Latin America, has lifted millions beyond subsistence living, Africa has gone backwards in terms of foreign trade, investment, and per capita income. This poverty has widespread effects, including lower life expectancy, violence, and instability factors intertwined with the continent's poverty.
Major economic successes are Botswana and South Africa, which is developed to the extent that it has its own mature stock exchange. This is partly due to its wealth of natural resources, being the world's leading producer of both gold and diamonds, and partly due to its well established legal system. South Africa also has access to financial capital, numerous markets and skilled labor. Other African countries are making comparable progress, such as Ghana, and some, like Egypt, have a longer history of commercial and economic success.
Nigeria sits on one of the largest proven oil reserves in the world and has the highest population among nations in Africa, with one of the fastest growing economies in the world. It is believed that with the country's rapidly expanding economy and increasing actions against corruption, Nigeria's status as Africa's economic powerhouse will soon be firmly established.
Demographics
Africans may be grouped according to whether they live north or south of the Sahara Desert these groups are called North Africans and Sub Saharan Africans, respectively. Afro Asiatic speaking peoples predominate in North Africa, while Sub Saharan Africa is dominated by a number of populations grouped according to their language Niger Congo predominantly in West Africa, Nilo Saharan in the Eastern highlands and Khoisan in the south.
Speakers of Bantu languages (part of the Niger Congo family) are the majority in southern, central and east Africa proper but there are also several Nilotic groups in East Africa, and a few remaining indigenous Khoisan ('San' or 'Bushmen') and Pygmy peoples in southern and central Africa, respectively. Bantu speaking Africans also predominate in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, and are found in parts of southern Cameroon and southern Somalia. In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as the Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present. The San are physically distinct from other Africans and are the indigenous people of southern Africa. Pygmies are the pre Bantu indigenous peoples of central Africa.
The peoples of North Africa comprise two main groups Berber and Arabic speaking peoples in the west, and Egyptians in the east. The Arabs who arrived in the 7th century introduced the Arabic language and Islam to North Africa. The Semitic Phoenicians, and the European Greeks and Romans settled in North Africa as well. Berbers still make up the majority in Morocco, while they are a significant minority within Algeria. They are also present in Tunisia and Libya. The Tuareg and other often nomadic peoples are the principal inhabitants of the Saharan interior of North Africa. Nubians are a Nilo Saharan speaking group (though many also speak Arabic), who developed an ancient civilization in Northeast Africa.
During the past century or so, small but economically important colonies of Lebanese and Chinese have also developed in the larger coastal cities of West and East Africa, respectively.
Some Ethiopian and Eritrean groups (like the Amhara and Tigrayans, collectively known as "Habesha") have Semitic (Sabaean) ancestry. The Somalis as a people originated in the Ethiopian Highlands, but most Somali clans can trace some Arab ancestry as well. Sudan and Mauritania are divided between a mostly Arabized north and a native African south (although the "Arabs" of Sudan clearly have a predominantly native African ancestry themselves). Some areas of East Africa, particularly the island of Zanzibar and the Kenyan island of Lamu, received Arab Muslim and Southwest Asian settlers and merchants throughout the Middle Ages and in antiquity.
Beginning in the 16th century, Europeans such as the Portuguese and Dutch began to establish trading posts and forts along the coasts of western and southern Africa. Eventually, a large number of Dutch, augmented by French Huguenots and Germans settled in what is today South Africa. Their descendants, the Afrikaners and the Coloureds, are the largest European descended groups in Africa today. In the 19th century, a second phase of colonization brought a large number of French and British settlers to Africa. The Portuguese settled mainly in Angola, but also in Mozambique. The French settled in large numbers in Algeria where they became known collectively as ''pieds noirs'', and on a smaller scale in other areas of North and West Africa as well as in Madagascar. The British settled chiefly in South Africa as well as the colony of Rhodesia, and in the highlands of what is now Kenya. Germans settled in what is now Tanzania and Namibia, and there is still a population of German speaking white Namibians. Smaller numbers of European soldiers, businessmen, and officials also established themselves in administrative centers such as Nairobi and Dakar. Decolonization during the 1960s often resulted in the mass emigration of European descended settlers out of Africa especially from Algeria, Angola, Kenya and Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). However, in South Africa and Namibia, the white minority remained politically dominant after independence from Europe, and a significant population of white Africans remained in these two countries even after democracy was finally instituted at the end of the Cold War. South Africa has also become the preferred destination of white Anglo Zimbabweans, and of migrants from all over southern Africa.
European colonization also brought sizeable groups of Asians, particularly people from the Indian subcontinent, to British colonies. Large Indian communities are found in South Africa, and smaller ones are present in Kenya, Tanzania, and some other southern and east African countries. A fairly large Indian community in Uganda was expelled by the dictator Idi Amin in 1972, though many have since returned. The islands in the Indian Ocean are also populated primarily by people of Asian origin, often mixed with Africans and Europeans. The Malagasy people of Madagascar are a Malay people, but those along the coast are generally mixed with Bantu, Arab, Indian and European origins. Malay and Indian ancestries are also important components in the group of people known in South Africa as Coloureds (people with origins in two or more races and continents).
Languages
extends from the Sahel to Southwest Asia. Niger Congo is divided to show the size of the Bantu sub family.
''Main article: African languages''
By most estimates Africa contains well over a thousand languages. There are four major language families native to Africa.
The ''Afro Asiatic'' languages are a language family of about 240 languages and 285 million people widespread throughout North Africa, East Africa, the Sahel, and Southwest Asia.
The ''Nilo Saharan'' language family consists of more than a hundred languages spoken by 30 million people. Nilo Saharan languages are mainly spoken in Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, and northern Tanzania.
The ''Niger Congo'' language family covers much of Sub Saharan Africa and is probably the largest language family in the world in terms of different languages. A substantial number of them are the Bantu languages spoken in much of sub Saharan Africa.
The ''Khoisan'' languages number about 50 and are spoken in Southern Africa by approximately 120 000 people. Many of the Khoisan languages are endangered. The Khoi and San peoples are considered the original inhabitants of this part of Africa.
With a few notable exceptions in East Africa, nearly all African countries have adopted official languages that originated outside the continent and spread through colonialism or human migration. For example, in numerous countries English and French are used for communication in the public sphere such as government, commerce, education and the media. Arabic, Portuguese, Afrikaans and Malagasy are other examples of originally non African languages that are used by millions of Africans today, both in the public and private spheres.
Culture
Africa has a number of overlapping cultures. The most conventional distinction is that between sub Saharan Africa and the northern countries from Egypt to Morocco, who largely associate themselves with Arabic culture. In this comparison, the nations to the south of the Sahara are considered to consist of many cultural areas, in particular that of the Bantu linguistic group.
Divisions may also be made between Francophone Africa and the rest of Africa, in particular the former British colonies of southern and East Africa. Another cultural fault line is that between those Africans living traditional lifestyles and those who are essentially modern. The traditionalists are sometimes subdivided into pastoralists and agriculturalists.
African art reflects the diversity of African cultures. The oldest existing art from Africa are 6000 year old carvings found in Niger, while the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt was the world's tallest architectural accomplishment for four thousand years until the creation of the Eiffel Tower. The Ethiopian complex of monolithic churches at Lalibela, of which the Church of St. George is representative, is regarded as another marvel of engineering.
The music of Africa is one of its most dynamic art forms. Egypt has long been a cultural focus of the Arab world, while remembrance of the rhythms of sub Saharan Africa, in particular west Africa, was transmitted through the Atlantic slave trade to modern blues, jazz, reggae, rap, and rock and roll. Modern music of the continent includes the highly complex choral singing of southern Africa and the dance rhythms of soukous, dominated by the music of the Democratic Republic of Congo. A recent development of the 21st century is the emergence of African hip hop, in particular a form from Senegal is blended with traditional mbalax. Recently in South Africa, a form of music related to house music known under the name Kwaito has developed, although the country has been home to its own form of South African jazz for some time, while Afrikaans music is completely distinct and comprised mostly of traditional Boere musiek, and forms of Folk and Rock.
List of African musicians
List of African writers
African Cinema
Afrology
Religion
Africans profess a wide variety of religious beliefs, with Christianity and Islam being the most widespread. Approximately 40 of all Africans are Christians and another 40 Muslims. Roughly 20 of Africans primarily follow indigenous African religions. A small number of Africans also have beliefs from the Judaic tradition, such as the Beta Israel and Lemba tribes.
The indigenous African religions tend to revolve around animism and ancestor worship. A common thread in traditional belief systems was the division of the spiritual world into "helpful" and "harmful". Helpful spirits are usually deemed to include ancestor spirits that help their descendants, and powerful spirits that protected entire communities from natural disaster or attacks from enemies whereas harmful spirits include the souls of murdered victims who were buried without the proper funeral rites, and spirits used by hostile spirit mediums to cause illness among their enemies. While the effect of these early forms of worship continues to have a profound influence, belief systems have evolved as they interact with other religions.
The formation of the Old Kingdom of Egypt in the third millennium BCE marked the first known complex religious system on the continent. Around the ninth century BCE, Carthage (in present day Tunisia) was founded by the Phoenicians, and went on to become a major cosmopolitan center where deities from neighboring Egypt, Rome and the Etruscan city states were worshipped.
The Ethiopian Orthodox Church officially dates from the fourth century, and is thus one of the first established Christian churches anywhere. At first Christian Orthodoxy made gains in modern day Sudan and other neighbouring regions however following the spread of Islam, growth was slow and restricted to the highlands.
Islam entered Africa as Muslims conquered North Africa between 640 and 710, beginning with Egypt. They established Mogadishu, Melinde, Mombasa, Kilwa, and Sofala, following the sea trade down the coast of East Africa, and diffusing through the Sahara desert into the interior of Africa following in particular the paths of Muslim traders. Muslims were also among the Asian peoples who later settled in British ruled Africa.
Many Africans were converted to West European forms of Christianity during the colonial period. In the last decades of the twentieth century, various sects of Charismatic Christianity rapidly grew. A number of Roman Catholic African bishops were even mentioned as possible papal candidates in 2005. African Christians appear to be more socially conservative than their co religionists in much of the industrialized world, which has quite recently led to tensions within denominations such as the Anglican and Methodist Churches.
Territories
Independent states
'''East Africa'''
East Africa proper
Burundi (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Kenya
! Mozambique (usually considered part of Southern Africa)
Rwanda (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Tanzania
Uganda
North East Africa (Horn of Africa)
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Somalia (including Somaliland)
'''Central Africa'''
! Angola (usually considered part of Southern Africa)
Burundi (also sometimes considered part of East Africa)
! Cameroon (usually considered part of West Africa)
Central African Republic
Chad (also sometimes considered part of West Africa)
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Equatorial Guinea (also sometimes considered part of West Africa)
Gabon (also sometimes considered part of West Africa)
Rwanda (also sometimes considered part of East Africa)
Republic of Congo
! Zambia (usually considered part of Southern Africa)
'''North Africa'''
Algeria
Egypt
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
'''Southern Africa'''
Angola (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Botswana
Lesotho
Malawi
Mozambique (also sometimes considered part of East Africa)
Namibia
South Africa
Swaziland
Zambia (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Zimbabwe
'''West Africa'''
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cameroon (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Chad (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
C te d'Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
Gabon (also sometimes considered part of Central Africa)
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Liberia
Mali
! Mauritania (usually considered part of North Africa)
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo
'''African Island Nations'''
Cape Verde (West Africa)
Comoros (Southern Africa)
Madagascar (Southern Africa)
Mauritius (Southern Africa)
S o Tom and Pr ncipe (Central Africa or West Africa)
Seychelles (East Africa)
Territories, possessions, d partements
Canary Islands (Spain)
Ceuta and Melilla (Spain claimed by Morocco)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte (France)
R union (France)
Saint Helena (including dependencies Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) (United Kingdom)
Disputed territories
Western Sahara is claimed and mostly occupied by Morocco. The remainder is administered by the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.
Table of territories and regions
border "1" cellpadding "4" cellspacing "0" style "border:1px solid aaa border collapse:collapse"
bgcolor " ECECEC"
! Name of territory,brwith flag
! Areabr(km)
! Populationbr(1 July 2002 est.)
! Population densitybr(per km)
! Capital
colspan 5 style "background: eee " '''Eastern Africa''':
Burundi
align "right" 27,830
align "right" 6,373,002
align "right" 229.0
Bujumbura
Comoros
align "right" 2,170
align "right" 614,382
align "right" 283.1
Moroni
Djibouti
align "right" 23,000
align "right" 472,810
align "right" 20.6
Djibouti
Eritrea
align "right" 121,320
align "right" 4,465,651
align "right" 36.8
Asmara
Ethiopia
align "right" 1,127,127
align "right" 67,673,031
align "right" 60.0
Addis Ababa
Kenya
align "right" 582,650
align "right" 31,138,735
align "right" 53.4
Nairobi
Madagascar
align "right" 587,040
align "right" 16,473,477
align "right" 28.1
Antananarivo
Malawi
align "right" 118,480
align "right" 10,701,824
align "right" 90.3
Lilongwe
Mauritius
align "right" 2,040
align "right" 1,200,206
align "right" 588.3
Port Louis
Mayotte (France)
align "right" 374
align "right" 170,879
align "right" 456.9
Mamoudzou
Mozambique
align "right" 801,590
align "right" 19,607,519
align "right" 24.5
Maputo
R union (France)
align "right" 2,512
align "right" 743,981
align "right" 296.2
Saint Denis
Rwanda
align "right" 26,338
align "right" 7,398,074
align "right" 280.9
Kigali
Seychelles
align "right" 455
align "right" 80,098
align "right" 176.0
Victoria
Somalia
align "right" 637,657
align "right" 7,753,310
align "right" 12.2
Mogadishu
Tanzania
align "right" 945,087
align "right" 37,187,939
align "right" 39.3
Dodoma
Uganda
align "right" 236,040
align "right" 24,699,073
align "right" 104.6
Kampala
Zambia
align "right" 752,614
align "right" 9,959,037
align "right" 13.2
Lusaka
Zimbabwe
align "right" 390,580
align "right" 11,376,676
align "right" 29.1
Harare
colspan 5 style "background: eee " '''Middle Africa''':
Angola
align "right" 1,246,700
align "right" 10,593,171
align "right" 8.5
Luanda
Cameroon
align "right" 475,440
align "right" 16,184,748
align "right" 34.0
Yaound
Central African Republic
align "right" 622,984
align "right" 3,642,739
align "right" 5.8
Bangui
Chad
align "right" 1,284,000
align "right" 8,997,237
align "right" 7.0
N'Djamena
Congo
align "right" 342,000
align "right" 2,958,448
align "right" 8.7
Brazzaville
Democratic Republic of the Congo
align "right" 2,345,410
align "right" 55,225,478
align "right" 23.5
Kinshasa
Equatorial Guinea
align "right" 28,051
align "right" 498,144
align "right" 17.8
Malabo
Gabon
align "right" 267,667
align "right" 1,233,353
align "right" 4.6
Libreville
S o Tom and Pr ncipe
align "right" 1,001
align "right" 170,372
align "right" 170.2
S o Tom
colspan 5 style "background: eee " '''Northern Africa''':
Algeria
align "right" 2,381,740
align "right" 32,277,942
align "right" 13.6
Algiers
Egypt
align "right" 1,001,450
align "right" 70,712,345
align "right" 70.6
Cairo
Libya
align "right" 1,759,540
align "right" 5,368,585
align "right" 3.1
Tripoli
Morocco
align "right" 446,550
align "right" 31,167,783
align "right" 69.8
Rabat
Sudan
align "right" 2,505,810
align "right" 37,090,298
align "right" 14.8
Khartoum
Tunisia
align "right" 163,610
align "right" 9,815,644
align "right" 60.0
Tunis
Western Sahara (Morocco)
align "right" 266,000
align "right" 256,177
align "right" 1.0
El Aai n
colspan 5 ''Southern Europe dependencies in Northern Africa'':
20px Canary Islands (Spain)
align "right" 7,492
align "right" 1,694,477
align "right" 226.2
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,br Santa Cruz de Tenerife
Ceuta (Spain)
align "right" 20
align "right" 71,505
align "right" 3,575.2
20px Madeira Islands (Portugal)
align "right" 797
align "right" 245,000
align "right" 307.4
Funchal
Melilla (Spain)
align "right" 12
align "right" 66,411
align "right" 5,534.2
colspan 5 style "background: eee " '''Southern Africa''':
Botswana
align "right" 600,370
align "right" 1,591,232
align "right" 2.7
Gaborone
Lesotho
align "right" 30,355
align "right" 2,207,954
align "right" 72.7
Maseru
Namibia
align "right" 825,418
align "right" 1,820,916
align "right" 2.2
Windhoek
South Africa
align "right" 1,219,912
align "right" 43,647,658
align "right" 35.8
Bloemfontein, Cape Town, Pretoria
Swaziland
align "right" 17,363
align "right" 1,123,605
align "right" 64.7
Mbabane
colspan 5 style "background: eee " '''Western Africa''':
Benin
align "right" 112,620
align "right" 6,787,625
align "right" 60.3
Porto Novo
Burkina Faso
align "right" 274,200
align "right" 12,603,185
align "right" 46.0
Ouagadougou
Cape Verde
align "right" 4,033
align "right" 408,760
align "right" 101.4
Praia
C te d'Ivoire
align "right" 322,460
align "right" 16,804,784
align "right" 52.1
Abidjan, Yamoussoukro
Gambia
align "right" 11,300
align "right" 1,455,842
align "right" 128.8
Banjul
Ghana
align "right" 239,460
align "right" 20,244,154
align "right" 84.5
Accra
Guinea
align "right" 245,857
align "right" 7,775,065
align "right" 31.6
Conakry
Guinea Bissau
align "right" 36,120
align "right" 1,345,479
align "right" 37.3
Bissau
Liberia
align "right" 111,370
align "right" 3,288,198
align "right" 29.5
Monrovia
Mali
align "right" 1,240,000
align "right" 11,340,480
align "right" 9.1
Bamako
Mauritania
align "right" 1,030,700
align "right" 2,828,858
align "right" 2.7
Nouakchott
Niger
align "right" 1,267,000
align "right" 10,639,744
align "right" 8.4
Niamey
Nigeria
align "right" 923,768
align "right" 129,934,911
align "right" 140.7
Abuja
Saint Helena (UK)
align "right" 410
align "right" 7,317
align "right" 17.8
Jamestown
Senegal
align "right" 196,190
align "right" 10,589,571
align "right" 54.0
Dakar
Sierra Leone
align "right" 71,740
align "right" 5,614,743
align "right" 78.3
Freetown
Togo
align "right" 56,785
align "right" 5,285,501
align "right" 93.1
Lom
style " font weight:bold "
Total
align "right" 30,368,609
align "right" 843,705,143
align "right" 27.8
''Notes:''br
small Continental regions as per UN categorisations map.br
small Depending on definitions, Egypt has territory in one or both of Africa and Asia.br
small Western Sahara is claimed and mostly occupied by Morocco. The remainder is administered by the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. smallbr
small The Spanish Canary Islands, of which Las Palmas de Gran Canaria are Santa Cruz de Tenerife are co capitals, are often considered part of Northern Africa due to their relative proximity to Morocco and Western Sahara population and area figures are for 2001.br
small The Spanish exclave of Ceuta is surrounded on land by Morocco in Northern Africa population and area figures are for 2001.br
small The Portuguese Madeira Islands are often considered part of Northern Africa due to their relative proximity to Morocco population and area figures are for 2001.br
small The Spanish exclave of Melilla is surrounded on land by Morocco in Northern Africa population and area figures are for 2001.br
small Bloemfontein is the judicial capital of South Africa, while Cape Town is its legislative seat, and Pretoria is the country's administrative seat.br
small Yamoussoukro is the official capital of C te d'Ivoire, while Abidjan is the ''de facto'' seat.br
See also
2005 in Africa 2006 in Africa
31st G8 summit
AIDS in Africa
African Anarchism
African philosophy
African Union
African cuisine
Confederation of African Football
Congo craton
Ecology of Africa
Education in Africa
History of Africa
Human rights in Africa
Regions of Africa
Sub Saharan Africa
Universities in Africa
Heart of Africa (game)
List of African countries by population density
List of African countries by population
List of African countries by GDP
List of African stock exchanges
External links
News
current news, events and statistics
Directories
directory from The Norwegian Council for Africa
directory category
Politics
Africa Action is the oldest organization in the US working on Africa affairs. It is a national organization that works for political, economic and social justice in Africa.
, western Africa from anarchist perspective.
people's and grassroots histories
Photos and Information
Jungle Photos Africa provides images and information on various countries in sub Saharan Africa.
Sports
Tourism
! The below are interlanguage links.
Category:Continents
tk:Afrika
af:Afrika
am:
ang:Africa
ar:
an:Africa
ast: frica
az:Afrika
bg:
zh min nan:Hui chiu
bn:
bs:Afrika
br:Afrika
ca: frica
cs:Afrika
cy:Affrica
da:Afrika
de:Afrika
et:Aafrika
el:
es: frica
eo:Afriko
eu:Afrika
fa:
fo:Afrika
fr:Afrique
fy:Afrika
ga:An Afraic
gd:Afraga
gl: frica
gu:
ko:
ht:Afrik
hr:Afrika
io:Afrika
id:Afrika
ia:Africa
is:Afr ka
it:Africa
he:
jv:Afrika
kn:
ku:Efr qa
kw:Afrika
sw:Afrika
la:Africa
lv: frika
lt:Afrika
lb:Afrika
li:Afrika
hu:Afrika
mk:
mg:Afrika
mt:Afrika
ms:Afrika
nl:Afrika
nds:Afrika
ja:
no:Afrika
nn:Afrika
pl:Afryka
pt: frica
ro:Africa
ru:
se:Afrihkk
sm:Aferika
sa:
sq:Afrika
sh:Afrika
scn: frica
simple:Africa
sk:Afrika
sl:Afrika
sr:
fi:Afrikka
sv:Afrika
tl:Aprika
ta:
th:
vi:Ch u Phi
to:Aferika
tr:Afrika
uk:
yi:
zh:
so:Afrika
REDIRECT Ashmore and Cartier Islands
'''Austin''' is a word that may refer to various things.
'''Austin''' can also be a given name.
Places in the U.S.
'''Austin''' may be the name of a town or city in the U.S.:
Austin, Texas, the capital of Texas (best known city with this name)
Austin, Arkansas
Austin, Colorado
Austin, Indiana
Austin, Kentucky
Austin Township, Michigan
Austin, Minnesota
Austin Township, Minnesota
Austin, Nevada
Austin, North Carolina
Austin, Pennsylvania
Austin, Utah
Port Austin, Michigan
Austinburg, Ohio
Other places in the U.S. named '''Austin''':
Austin, Chicago, a neighborhood in Chicago
Austin College, a college in Sherman, Texas
Lake Austin
Places in Canada
Austin Flat, British Columbia
Austin Heights, British Columbia
Austin Subdivision No 1, British Columbia
Austin Subdivision No 2, British Columbia
Austin, Manitoba
Austin, Ontario
Austin, Quebec
Names of people named Austin
Austin Powers, a fictional movie spy
Albert Austin
Herbert Austin, Sir Herbert Austin, founder of the Austin Motor Company
John Austin (legal philosophy)
J. L. Austin, philosopher
John Arnold Austin, United States Navy warrant officer
Phil Austin, member of the Firesign Theatre
Sherrie Austin, musician
Stephen F. Austin, founder of Texas
Steve Austin (fictional character), the title character in Martin Caidin's novel ''Cyborg'', which inspired the TV series "The Six Million Dollar Man"
Col. Steve Austin (fictional character), the lead character played by Lee Majors in the TV series "The Six Million Dollar Man".
Stone Cold Steve Austin, a Professional wrestler turned actor
Saint Augustine, noticeable in the English version "Austin Friars" to refer to the '''Augustinian Order'''.
:''See also Jane Austen, the author.''
Things named Austin
Austin Motor Company, a British make of car
American Austin Car Company, a short lived United States make of automobile
Austin (brand), a brand owned by the Kellogg Company
USS ''Austin'', a sloop of war (originally in the Texas Navy)
USS ''Austin'' (DE 15), a destroyer escort
USS ''Austin'' (LPD 4), an amphibious transport dock
Austin elementary school
da:Austin
de:Austin
fr:Austin
io:Austin
it:Austin
ja: ( )
pl:Austin
ru:
sv:Austin
REDIRECT Animation
REDIRECT ASCII art
div style "float: right width: 30 margin: 1em"
br small''This animation moves at 10 frames per second.'' small
br br small''This animation moves at 2 frames per second. At this rate, the individual frames should be discernible.'' smallbr br small''12 frames per second is the typical rate for an animated cartoon.'' small
div
'''Animation''' is the illusion of motion created by the consecutive display of images of static elements. In film and video production, this refers to techniques by which each frame of a film or movie is produced individually. These frames may be generated by computers, or by photographing a drawn or painted image, or by repeatedly making small changes to a model unit (see claymation and stop motion), and then photographing the result with a special animation camera. When the frames are strung together and the resulting film is viewed, there is an illusion of continuous movement due to the phenomenon known as persistence of vision. Generating such a film tends to be very labour intensive and tedious, though the development of computer animation has greatly sped up the process.
Graphics file formats like GIF, MNG, SVG and Flash(SWF) allow animation to be viewed on a computer or over the Internet.
TOC
Animation techniques
Traditional animation began with each frame being painted and then filmed. Cel animation, developed by Bray and Hurd in the 1910s, sped up the process by using transparent overlays so that characters could be moved without the need to repaint the background for every frame. More recently, styles of animation based on painting and drawing have evolved, such as the minimalist Simpsons cartoons, or the roughly sketched The Snowman.
Computer animation has advanced rapidly, and is now approaching the point where movies can be created with characters so lifelike as to be hard to distinguish from real actors. This involved a move from 2D to 3D, the difference being that in 2D animation the effect of perspective is created artistically, but in 3D objects are modeled in an internal 3D representation within the computer, and are then 'lit' and 'shot' from chosen angles, just as in real life, before being 'rendered' to a 2D bitmapped frame. Predictions that famous dead actors might even be 'brought back to life' to play in new movies before long have led to speculation about the moral and copyright issues involved. The use of computer animation as a way of achieving the otherwise impossible in conventionally shot movies has led to the term "computer generated imagery" being used, though the term has become hard to distinguish from computer animation as it is now used in referring to 3D movies that are entirely animated.
Computer animation involves modelling, motion generation, followed by the addition of surfaces and then rendering. Surfaces are programmed to stretch and bend automatically in response to movements of a 'wire frame model', and the final rendering converts such movements to a bitmap image. It is the recent developments in rendering complex surfaces like fur and clothing textures that have enabled stunningly life like character models, including surfaces that even ripple, fold and blow in the wind, with every fibre or hair individually calculated for rendering. However, that actually has little to do with the animation itself. Animation is the process of bringing a lifeless puppet to life through the use of motion. Many people confuse fancy effects and high res textures with animation, but in fact life like motion can be created using the simplest of models. Pixar's work is a testament to this. The goal of an animator is not simply to "copy" the real world, but to enhance and to take the essence of the motion that is there, and this is how animation can be elevated to the level of art.
There is a large misconception in the public mind that computers create animation today. This couldn't be further from the truth. A computer is nothing more (though also nothing less) than a very expensive fancy pencil, and has to be treated as such for any quality work to be acheived. The choices a computer makes when interpolating motion are almost always the wrong ones, because the computer does not know what you are trying to create. Even if a complex physics system were created complete enough to exactly mimic the real world, the end result would not be the desirable one, because a large part of animation concerns the choices an animator makes. When a computer tries to make the choices for you, disaster is the general result.
History
The major use of animation has always been for entertainment. However, there is growing use of instructional animation and educational animation to support explanation and learning.
The "classic" form of animation, the "animated cartoon", as developed in the early 1900s and refined by Ub Iwerks, Walt Disney and others, requires up to 24 distinct drawings for one second of animation. This technique is described in detail in the article Traditional animation.
Because animation is very time consuming and often very expensive to produce, the majority of animation for TV and movies comes from professional animation studios. However, the field of independent animation has existed at least since the 1950s, with animation being produced by independent studios (and sometimes by a single person). Several independent animation producers have gone on to enter the professional animation industry. Bill Plympton is one of the most well known independent animators today.
Limited animation is a way of increasing production and decreasing costs of animation by using "short cuts" in the animation process. This method was pioneered by UPA and popularized (some say exploited) by Hanna Barbera, and adapted by other studios as cartoons moved from movie theaters to television.
Animation studios
Animation Studios, like Movie Studios may be production facilities, or financial entities. In some cases, especially in Anime they have things in common with artists studios where a Master or group of talented individuals oversee the work of lesser artists and crafts persons in realising their vision.
Styles and techniques of animation
style "width:20 " valign "top"
Traditional animation
Character animation
Limited animation
Rotoscoping
style "width:20 " valign "top"
Computer animation
Multi Sketching
skeletal animation
Morph target animation
Cel shaded animation
Onion skinning
Analog computer animation
Motion capture
Tradigital animation
style "width:20 " valign "top"
Stop motion animation
Cutout animation
claymation
Pixilation
Pinscreen animation
Puppetoon
style "width:20 " valign "top"
Drawn on film animation
Special effects animation
Branch pages
Computer animation
Computer generated imagery
Traditional animation
Animated cartoon
Motion capture
Avar (animation variable)
Wire frame model
Animated series
Anime (Japanese animation)
List of animation studios
Famous names in animation
See also
List of motion picture topics
List of movie genres
Further Readings
Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, Disney animation: The Illusion Of Life, Abbeville 1981
Walters Faber, Helen Walters, Algrant (Ed.), ''Animation Unlimited: Innovative Short Films Since 1940'', HarperCollins Publishers 2004
Trish Ledoux, Doug Ranney, Fred Patten (Ed.), ''Complete Anime Guide: Japanese Animation Film Directory and Resource Guide'', Tiger Mountain Press 1997
The Animator's Survival Kit, Richard Williams
Animation Script to Screen, Shamus Culhane
The Animation Book, Kit Laybourne
External links
! These links need annotation to distinguish the true reference sites
from the ones merely using Wikipedia to drive business to their ad supported site
, akovec school of animation
Animation
Category:Film
bs:Animacija
cs:Animovan film
de:Animation
eo:animacio
es:Animaci n
et:Animatsioon
fa:
fi:Animaatio
fr:Animation
gl:Cine de animaci n
he:
hu:Anim ci
it:Cartone animato
ja:
ko:
lv:Multiplik cija
mk:
nl:Animatie
pl:Film animowany
pt:Anima o
ru:
simple:Animation
sq:Animation
sv:Animering
th:
zh:
.
In Greek and Roman mythology, '''Apollo''' (Greek: , '''''Ap lln''''' or , ''Apelln'') was a god of light, healing and poetry. Apollo was the son of Zeus and Leto, and the twin brother of Artemis, goddess of the hunt. As the prophetic deity of the Delphic Oracle, Apollo was one of the most important and many sided of the Olympian deities. In Etruscan mythology, he was known as Aplu.
In later times, Apollo became partly confused or equated with Helios, god of the sun, and his sister similarly equated with Selene, god of the moon, particularly in religious contexts. However, Apollo and Helios remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts.
Domains and symbols
and the mortal Leto.
Apollo was considered to have dominion over disease, beauty, light, healing, colonists, medicine, archery, poetry, prophecy, dance, reason, intellectualism, and shamans, and was the patron defender of herds and flocks.
Apollo's most common attributes were the lyre and the bow. Other attributes of his included the kithara (an advanced version of the common lyre) and plectrum. Another common emblem was the sacrificial tripod, representing his prophetic powers. The Pythian Games were held in Apollo's honor every four years at Delphi. The laurel bay plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at these games. The palm tree was also sacred to Apollo because he had been born under one in Delos. Animals sacred to Apollo included wolves, dolphins and roe, swans and grasshoppers (symbolizing music and song), hawks, ravens, crows and snakes (referencing Apollo's function as the god of prophecy), mice, and griffins, mythical eagle lion hybrids of Eastern origin.
As god of colonization, Apollo gave guidance on colonies, especially during the height of colonization, 750550 BC. According to Greek tradition, he helped Cretan or Arcadian colonists find the city of Troy. However, this story may reflect a cultural influence which had the reverse direction: Hittite cuneiform texts mention a Minor Asian god called ''Appaliunas'' or ''Apalunas'' in connection with the city of ''Wilusa'', which is now regarded as being identical with the Greek Illios by most scholars. In this interpretation, Apollo s title of ''Lykegenes'' can simply be read as "born in Lycia", which effectively severs the god's supposed link with wolves (possibly a folk etymology).
Apollo popularly (e.g., in literary criticism) represents harmony, order, and reasonscharacteristics contrasted with those of Dionysus, god of wine, who popularly represents emotion and disorder. The contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives ''Apollonian'' and ''Dionysian''. However, the Greeks thought of the two qualities as complementary: the two gods are brothers, and when Apollo at winter left for Hyperborea, he would leave the Delphi Oracle to Dionysus.
Worship
Apollo had a famous oracle in Delphi, and other notable ones in Clarus and Branchidae. Apollo is known as the leader of the Muses ('''''musagetes''''') and director of their choir. Hymns sung to Apollo were called Paeans.
The Roman worship of Apollo was adopted from the Greeks. There is a tradition that the Delphic oracle was consulted as early as the period of the kings during the reign of Tarquinius Superbus. In 430, a temple was dedicated to Apollo on the occasion of a pestilence. During the Second Punic War in 212, the Ludi Apollinares were instituted in his honor. In the time of Augustus, who considered himself under the special protection of Apollo and was even said to be his son, His worship developed and he became one of the chief gods of Rome. After the battle of Actium, Augustus enlarged his old temple, dedicated a portion of the spoils to him, and instituted quinquennial games in his honour. He also erected a new temple on the Palatine hill and transferred the secular games, for which Horace composed his ''Carmen Saeculare'', to Apollo and Diana.
The chief festivals held in honour of Apollo were the Carneia, Daphnephoria, Delia, Hyacinthia, Pyanepsia, Pythia and Thargelia. The Ludi Apollinares were solemn games held to honor him.
The worship of Apollo has returned with the rise of revivalist Hellenic polytheism, and the contemporary Pagan movement. One example of this revival is the group . Also, together with Athena, Apollo (under the name Phevos) was controversially designated as a mascot of the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.
Etymology
The name ''Apollo'' might have been derived from a Pre Hellenic compound ''Apo ollon'', likely related to an archaic verb ''Apo ell '' and literally meaning "he who elbows off", that is "the Dispelling One." Indeed, he seems to have personified dispelling power, which would relate to his association with the darkness dispelling power of the morning sun and the conceived power of reason and prophecy to dispel doubt and ignorance.
In addition:
The apparent expelling character of city walls and doorways as bulwarks against trespassers
The people dispelling nature of disembarkations and expatriations to colonies
The disease dispelling character of healing
The predator dispelling character of a shepherd tending his flocks
The pest dispelling nature of a farmer growing crops
The power of music and the arts to dispel discord and barbary
The highly important power of fit and skilled young men to dispel intruders and invading armies
The ability of foresight into the future
An explanation given by Plutarch in ''Moralia'' is that Apollon signified a unity, since ''pollon'' meant "many," and the prefix ''a '' was a negative. Thus, Apollon could be read as meaning "deprived of multitude." Apollo was consequently associated with the monad.
Hesychius connects the name Apollo with the Doric , which means assembly, so that Apollo would be the god of political life, and he also gives the explanation ("fold"), in which case Apollo would be the god of flocks and herds.
in a Roman floor mosaic, El Djem, Tunisia, lare 2nd century
Apollo in art
In art, Apollo is usually depicted as a handsome beardless young man and often with a lyre or bow in hand. In the late 2nd century floor mosaic from El Djem, Roman Thysdrus, (''illustration, right''), he is identifiable as Apollo Helios by his effulgent halo, though now even a god's divine nakedness is concealed by his cloak, a mark of increasing conventions of modesty in the later Empire. Anther haloed Apollo in mosaic, from Hadrumentum, is in the museum at Sousse .The conventions of this representation, head tilted, lips slightly parted, large eyed, curling hair cut in locks grazing the neck, were developed in the 3rd century BCE to depict Alexander the Great (Bieber 1964, Yalouris 1980). Some time after this mosaic was executed, the earliest depictions of Christ will be beardless and haloed.
Appellations
Epithets applied to Apollo include:
'''Phoebus''' ("shining one"), for Apollo in the context of the god of light
'''Smintheus''' ("mouse catcher") and '''Parnopius''' ("grasshopper"), as god of the plague and defender against rats and locusts.
'''Delphinios''' ("delphinian"), meaning "of the womb", associating Apollo with ''Delphoi'' (Delphi). An aitiology in the Homeric hymns connects the epitheton to dolphins.
'''Archegetes''', ("director of the foundation") for colonies.
'''Musagetes''' ("leader of the muses").
'''Pythios''' ("Pythian") at Delphi
'''Apotropaeus''' ("he who averts evil")
'''Nymphegetes''' ("nymph leader")
'''Lyceios''' and '''Lykegenes''' ("wolfish" or "of Lycia," where some postulate his cult originated)
'''Nomios''' ("wandering"), as the pastoral shepherd god
'''Klarios''' from Doric ''klaros'' "allotment of land", for his supervision over cities and colonies.
'''Kynthios''' is another epithet, stemming from his birth on Mt. Cynthus
'''Loxias''' ("the obscure"), as Apollo a god of prophecy specifically.
'''Argurotoxos''', ("with the silver bow") for archery.
'''Aphetoros''', ("god of the bow") for archery.
'''Alexikakos''', ("restrainer of evil"), as Apollo the healer.
'''Akesios''' or '''Iatros''', "healer"
Birth
When Hera discovered that Leto was pregnant and that Hera's husband, Zeus, was the father, she banned Leto from giving birth on "terra firma", or the mainland, or any island at sea. In her wanderings, Leto found the newly created floating island of Delos, which was neither mainland nor a real island, and gave birth there. The island was surrounded by swans. Afterwards, Zeus secured Delos to the bottom of the ocean. This island later became sacred to Apollo. Alternatively, Hera kidnapped Ilithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to prevent Leto from going into labor. The other gods tricked Hera into letting her go by offering her a necklace, nine yards long, of amber. Either way, Artemis was born first and then assisted with the birth of Apollo. Another version states that Artemis was born one day before Apollo, on the island of Ortygia and that she helped Leto cross the sea to Delos the next day to give birth to Apollo. Apollo was born on the 7th day () of the month Thargelion according to Delian tradition or of the month Bysios according to Delphian tradition. The 7th and 20th, the days of the new and full moon, were ever afterwards held sacred to him.
Youth
In his youth, Apollo killed the vicious dragon Python, which lived in Delphi beside the Castalian Spring, according to some because Python had attempted to rape Leto while she was pregnant with Apollo and Artemis.This was the spring which emitted vapors that caused the Oracle at Delphi to give her prophesies. Apollo killed Python but had to be punished for it, since Python was a child of Gaia.
Apollo and Admetus
When Zeus struck down Apollo's son, Asclepius, with a lightning bolt for resurrecting the dead (and thus stealing Hades's subjects), Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclops, who had fashioned the bolt for Zeus. Apollo would have been banished to Tartarus forever, but was instead sentenced to one year of hard labour as punishment, thanks to the intercession of his mother, Leto. During this time he served as shepherd for King Admetus of Pherae in Thessaly. Admetus treated Apollo well, and, in return, the god conferred great benefits on Admetus.
Apollo helped Admetus win Alcestis, the daughtor of King Pelias and later convinced the Fates to let Admetus live past his time if another took his place. But when it came time for Admetus to die, his elderly parents, whom he had assumed would gladly die for him, refused to cooperate. Instead, Alcestis took his place, but Heracles managed to "persuade" Thanatos, the god of death, to return her to the world of the living.
Apollo during the Trojan War
Apollo shot arrows infected with the plague into the Greek encampment during the Trojan War in rage because the Greeks had kidnapped Chryseis, the daughter of Apollo's priest. He demanded her return, and the Greeks eventually complied.
When Diomedes injured Aeneas during the Trojan War, Apollo rescued him. First, Aphrodite tried to rescue Aeneas but Diomedes injured her as well. Aeneas was then enveloped in a cloud by Apollo, who took him to Pergamos, a sacred spot in Troy. Artemis healed Aeneas there.
Apollo had aided Paris in the killing of Achilles, if Paris did not accomplish the task himself.
Niobe
A Queen of Thebes and wife of Amphion, Niobe boasted of her superiority to Leto because she had fourteen children (Niobids), seven male and seven female, while Leto had only two. Apollo killed her sons as they practiced athletics, with the last begging for his life, and Artemis her daughters. Apollo and Artemis used poisoned arrows to kill them, though according to some versions of the myth, a number of the Niobids were spared (Chloris, usually). Amphion, at the sight of his dead sons, either killed himself or was killed by Apollo after swearing revenge. A devastated Niobe fled to Mt. Siplyon in Asia Minor and turned into stone as she wept. Her tears formed the river Achelous. Zeus had turned all the people of Thebes to stone and so no one buried the Niobids until the ninth day after their death, when the gods themselves entombed them.
Apollo's romantic life and children
Female lovers
Apollo chased the nymph Daphne, daughter of Peneus, who had scorned him. His infatuation was caused by an arrow from Eros, who was jealous because Apollo had made fun of his archery skills. Eros also claimed to be irritated by Apollo's singing. Simultaneously, however, Eros had shot a hate arrow into Daphne, causing her to be repulsed by Apollo. Following a spirited chase by Apollo, Daphne prayed to Mother earth (alternatively, her father a river god) to help her and he changed her into a Laurel tree, which became sacred to Apollo.
Apollo had an affair with a mortal princess named Leucothea, daughter of Orchamus and sister of Clytia. Leucothea loved Apollo who disguised himself as Leucothea's mother to gain entrance to her chambers. Clytia, jealous of her sister because she wanted Apollo for herself, told Orchamus the truth, betraying her sister's trust and confidence in her. Enraged, Orchamus ordered Leucothea to be buried alive. Apollo refused to forgive Clytia for betraying his beloved, and a grieving Clytia wilted and slowly died. Apollo changed her into an incense plant, either heliotrope or sunflower, which follows the sun every day.
Marpessa was kidnapped by Idas but was loved by Apollo as well. Zeus made her choose between them, and she chose Idas on the grounds that Apollo, being immortal, would tire of her when she grew old.
Castalia was a nymph whom Apollo loved. She fled from him and dived into the spring at Delphi, at the base of Mt. Parnassos, which was then named after her. Water from this spring was sacred it was used to clean the Delphian temples and inspire poets.
By Cyrene, Apollo had a son named Aristaeus, who became the patron god of cattle, fruit trees, hunting, husbandry and bee keeping. He was also a culture hero and taught humanity dairy skills and the use of nets and traps in hunting, as well as how to cultivate olives.
With Hecuba, wife of King Priam of Troy, Apollo had a son named Troilius. An oracle prophesied that Troy would not be defeated as long as Troilius reached the age of twenty alive. He and his sister, Polyxena were ambushed and killed by Achilles.
Apollo also fell in love with Cassandra, daughter of Hecuba and Priam, and Troilius' half sister. He promised Cassandra the gift of prophecy to seduce her, but she rejected him afterwards. Enraged, Apollo indeed gifted her with the ability to know the future, with a curse that no one would ever believe her.
Coronis, daughter of Phlegyas, King of the Lapiths, was another of Apollo's liaisons. Pregnant with Asclepius, Coronis fell in love with Ischys, son of Elatus. A crow informed Apollo of the affair. When first informed he disbelieved the crow and turned all crows black (where they were previously white) as a punishment for speading untruths. When he found out the truth he sent his sister, Artemis, to kill Coronis. As a result he also made the crow sacred and gave them the task of announcing important deaths. Apollo rescued the baby and gave it to the centaur Chiron to raise. Phlegyas was irate after the death of his daughter and burned the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. Apollo then killed him for what he did.
Male lovers
Apollo, the eternal beardless kouros himself, had the most male lovers of all the Greek gods. That was to be expected from a god who was god of the palaestra, the athletic gathering place for youth who all competed in the nude, a god said to represent the ideal educator and therefore the ideal erastes, or lover of a boy (Sergent, p.102). All his lovers were younger than him, in the style of the Greek pederastic relationships of the time. Many of Apollo's young beloveds died "accidentally", a reflection on the function of these myths as part of rites of passage, in which the youth died in order to be reborn as an adult.
Hyacinth was one of his male lovers. Hyacinthus was a Spartan prince, beautiful and athletic. The pair were practicing throwing the discus when Hyacinthus was struck in the head by a discus blown off course by Zephyrus, who was jealous of Apollo and loved Hyacinthus as well. When Hyacinthus died, Apollo is said in some accounts to have been so filled with grief that he cursed his own immortality, wishing to join his lover in mortal death. Out of the blood of his slain lover Apollo created the hyacinth flower as a memorial to his death, and his tears stained the flower petals with '' '' '' '', meaning alas. The Festival of Hyacinthus was a celebration of Sparta.
One of his other liaisons was with Acantha, the spirit of the acanthus tree. Upon his death, he was transformed into a sun loving herb by Apollo, and his bereaved sister, Acanthis, was turned into a thistle finch by the other gods.
Another male lover was Cyparissus, a descendant of Heracles. Apollo gave the boy a tame deer as a companion but Cyparissus accidentally killed it with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth. Cyparissus asked Apollo to let his tears fall forever. Apollo turned the sad boy into a cypress tree, which was said to be a sad tree because the sap forms droplets like tears on the trunk.
Apollo and the Birth of Hermes
Hermes was born on Mount Cyllene in Arcadia. The story is told in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes. His mother, Maia, had been secretly impregnated by Zeus, in a secret affair. Maia wrapped the infant in blankets but Hermes escaped while she was asleep. Hermes ran to Thessaly, where Apollo was grazing his cattle. The infant Hermes stole a number of his cows and took them to a cave in the woods near Pylos, covering their tracks. In the cave, he found a tortoise and killed it, then removed the insides. He used one of the cow's intestines and the tortoise shell and made the first lyre. Apollo complained to Maia that her son had stolen his cattle, but Hermes had already replaced himself in the blankets she had wrapped him in, so Maia refused to believe Apollo's claim. Zeus intervened and, claiming to have seen the events, sided with Apollo. Hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented. Apollo, a god of music, fell in love with the instrument and offered to allow exchange the cattle for the lyre. Hence, Apollo became a master of the lyre and Hermes invented a kind of pipes instrument called a syrinx.
Later, Apollo exchanged a caduceus for a syrinx from Hermes.
Other stories
Musical contests
Pan
Once Pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of Apollo, and to challenge Apollo, the god of the lyre, to a trial of skill. Tmolus, the mountain god, was chosen to umpire. Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, Midas, who happened to be present. Then Apollo struck the strings of his lyre. Tmolus at once awarded the victory to Apollo, and all but Midas agreed with the judgment. He dissented, and questioned the justice of the award. Apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer, and caused them to become the ears of a donkey.
Marsyas
, c.1570 76.
Marsyas was a satyr who challenged Apollo to a contest of music. He had found an aulos on the ground, tossed away after being invented by Athena because it made her cheeks puffy. Marsyas lost and was flayed alive in a cave near Calaenae in Phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god. His blood turned into the river Marsyas.
Another variation is that Apollo played his instrument (the lyre) upside down. Marsyas could not do this with his instrument (the flute), and so Apollo hung him from a tree and flayed him alive. taken from ''MAN MYTH MAGIC'' by Richard Cavendish
Miscellaneous
When Zeus killed Asclepius for raising the dead and violating the natural order of things, Apollo killed the Cyclopes in response. They had fashioned Zeus' thunderbolts, which he used to kill Apollo's son, Asclepius. As punishment, he was condemned by Zeus to year's servitude to King Admetus.
Apollo gave the order, through the Oracle at Delphi, for Orestes to kill his mother, Clytemnestra, and her lover, Aegisthus. Orestes was punished fiercely by the Erinyes for this crime.
In the Odyssey, Odysseus and his surviving crew landed on an island sacred to Helios the sun god, where he kept sacred cattle. Though Odysseus warned his men not to (as Tiresias and kirke had told him), they killed and ate some of the cattle and Helios had Zeus destroy the ship and all the men save Odysseus.
Apollo also had a lyre playing contest with Cinyras, his son, who committed suicide when he lost.
Apollo killed the Aloadae when they attempted to storm Mt. Olympus.
It was also said that Apollo rode on the back of a swan to the land of the Hyperboreans during the winter months, a swan that he also lent to his beloved Hyacinthus to ride.
Apollo turned Cephissus into a sea monster.
'''Consorts Children'''
Male Beloveds
Acantha
Cyparissus
Hyacinth
Hymenaeus
Female Lovers
Arsinoe
Asclepius
Cassandra
Calliope
Linus
Orpheus
Chione
Philammon
Coronis
Asclepius
Cyrene
Aristaeus
Daphne
Dryope
Amphissus
Hecuba
Troilius
Polyxena
Leucothea
Manto
Mopsus
Psamathe
Linus
Rhoeo
Anius
Terpsichore
Linus
Unknown Mother
Cinyras
Cycnus
Phemonoe
Urania
Linus
Spoken word myths audio files
border "1" cellpadding "5" cellspacing "0"
! style "background: ffdead " Apollo Myths as told by story tellers
1. ''Apollo and Hyacinthus,'' read by Timothy Carter
'''Bibliography of reconstruction:''' Homer, ''Illiad'' ii.595 600 (c. 700 BC) Various 5th century BC vase paintings Palaephatus, ''On Unbelievable Tales'' 46. Hyacinthus (330 BC) Apollodorus, ''Library'' 1.3.3 (140 BC) Ovid, ''Metamorphoses'' 10. 162 219 (AD 1 8) Pausanias, ''Description of Greece'' 3.1.3, 3.19.4 (AD 160 176) Philostratus the Elder, ''Images'' i.24 Hyacinthus (AD 170 245) Philostratus the Younger, ''Images'' 14. Hyacinthus (AD 170 245) Lucian, ''Dialogues of the Gods'' 14 (AD 170) First Vatican Mythographer, 197. Thamyris et Musae
Apollo in popular culture
In the ''Star Trek'' episode "Who Mourns for Adonis?" a man claiming to be Apollo is seen on a Greek themed planet that Captain Kirk, Pavel Chekov, Mr. Spock, and Dr. McCoy arrive on.
In the ''Battlestar Galactica'' series, one of the main characters is given the call sign of Apollo.
The song "Cygnus X 1 Book II: Hemispheres" by Rush is about the struggle between the champions of the two Hemispheres, Apollo, the God of Reason, and Dionysus, the God of Love. The song appears of the 1978 album ''Hemispheres''.
In the sixties, NASA named its Apollo Lunar program because Apollo was considered the god of all wisdom. Many people mistakenly believe that the rockets that carried astronauts to the Moon were called Apollo rockets they were Saturn V rockets.
References
F. L. W. Schwartz, ''De antiquissima Apollinis Natura'' (Berlin, 1843)
J. A. Sch nborn, '' ber das Wesen Apollons'' (Berlin, 1854)
Arthur Milchhoefer, '' ber den attischen Apollon'' (Munich, 1873)
Theodor Schreiber, ''Apollon Pythoktonos'' (Leipzig, 1879)
W. H. Roscher, ''Studien zur vergleichenden Mythologie der Griechen und Romer'', i. (Leipzig, 1873)
R. Hecker, ''De Apollinis apud Romanos Cultu'' (Leipzig, 1879)
Gaston Colin, ''Le Culte d'Apollon pythien Ath nes'' (1905)
Louis Dyer, ''Studies of the Gods in Greece'' (1891)
articles in Pauly Wissowa's ''Realencyclop die'', W. H. Roscher's ''Lexikon der Mythologie'', and Daremberg and Saglio's ''Dictionnaire des antiquit s''
L. Preller, ''Griechische und romische Mythologie'' (4th ed. by C. Robert)
J. Marquardt, ''R mische Staalsverwaltung'', iii.
G. Wissowa, ''Religion und Kultus der Romer'' (1902)
D. Bassi, ''Saggio di Bibliografia mitologica'', i. ''Apollo'' (1896)
L. Farnell, ''Cults of the Greek States'', iv. (1907)
O. Gruppe, ''Griechische Mythologie und Religionsgeschichte'', ii. (1906)
M. Bieber, 1964. ''Alexander the Great in Greek and Roman Art'' (Chicago)
N. Yalouris, 1980. ''The Search for Alexander'' (Boston) Exhibition.
2. For the iconography of the Alexander Helios type, see H. Hoffmann, "Helios," Journal of the Arnerican Research Center in Egypt 2 (1963) 117 23 cf. Yalouris, no. 42.
External links
Category:Greek gods
Category:Roman gods
Category:Solar gods
Category:Pederastic heroes and deities
ar: ( )
bg:
ca:Apol lo
cs:Apoll n
da:Apollon
de:Apollon
el:
es:Apolo
eo:Apolono
fr:Apollon
gl:Apolo
ko:
hr:Apolon
it:Apollo (mitologia)
he:
kw:Appolyn
la:Apollo
lt:Apolonas
hu:Apoll n
nl:Apollo (god)
ja:
no:Apollon
nn:Apollon
pl:Apollo (mitologia)
pt:Apolo (mitologia)
ro:Apollo (mitologie)
ru: ( )
sk:Apol n
sl:Apolon
sr:
fi:Apollon
sv:Apollon
vi:Apollo (th n tho i)
tr:Apollon
uk:
zh:
Infobox Tennis player
image
playername Andre Agassi
country United States
residence Las Vegas, USA
datebirth April 29, 1970
placebirth Las Vegas, USA
height 5'11" (180 cm)
weight 177 lbs (80 kg)
turnedpro 1986
plays Right
grip
careerprizemoney 31,006,875
singlestitles 60
highestsinglesranking No. 1 (April 10, 1995)
AustralianOpenresult '''W''' (1995, 2000, 2001, 2003)
FrenchOpenresult '''W''' (1999)
Wimbledonresult '''W''' (1992)
USOpenresult '''W''' (1994, 1999)
doublestitles 1
highestdoublesranking No. 123 (August 17, 1992)
'''Andre Kirk Agassi''', (born April 29 1970, in Las Vegas, Nevada) is a professional male former '''World No. 1''' tennis player from the United States. He has won eight Grand Slam singles titles, and is one of only five players to have won all four Grand Slam events. He is considered among the all time great tennis players.
Agassi was married to the actress Brooke Shields from 1997 to 1999. Since 2001, he has been married to the former World No. 1 woman tennis player Steffi Graf and had two children.
Early life
Agassi's father, (an Armenian from Iran) Emmanuel "Mike" Agassian (who represented Iran in boxing at the 1948 and 1952 Olympic Games before emigrating to the United States), was intent on having a child win all four tennis Grand Slams. He called Agassi's two older siblings "guinea pigs" in the development of his coaching techniques. He honed Andre's eye coordination when he was an infant by hanging tennis balls above his crib. He gave Agassi paddles and balloons when he was still in a high chair. When Agassi started playing tennis, his ball collection filled 60 garbage cans with 300 balls per can, and Agassi would hit 3,000 5,000 balls every day. When Andre was five years old, he was already practicing with pros such as Jimmy Connors and Roscoe Tanner.
Mike Agassi learned tennis by watching tapes of champions. Mike Agassi took a very systematic approach to the physics and psychology of tennis, and still remains active in the sport. (More information can be found in Mike Agassi's book, ''The Agassi Story''.)
At age of 14, Andre was shipped off to teaching guru Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy in Florida. He turned professional when he was 16.
Tennis career
1986 1997
Agassi turned professional in 1986, and won his first top level singles title in 1987 at Itaparica. He won six further tournaments in 1988, and by December that year he had surpassed US 2 million in career prize money after playing in just 43 tournaments the quickest player in history to do so.
As a young up and coming player, Agassi embraced a rebel image. He grew his hair to rock star length, sported an ear ring, and wore colorful shirts that pushed tennis' still strict sartorial boundaries. He boasted of a cheeseburger heavy diet and endorsed the Canon Rebel camera. "Image is everything" was the ad's tag line, and it became Andre's as well.
Strong performances on the tour meant that Agassi was quickly tipped as a future Grand Slam champion. But he began the 1990s with a series of near misses. He reached his first Grand Slam final in 1990 at the French Open, where he lost in four sets to the seasoned veteran player Andr s G mez. Later that year he lost in the final of the US Open to another up and coming teenaged star, Pete Sampras. The rivalry between these two American players was to become the dominant rivalry in tennis over the rest the of the decade. In 1991, Agassi reached his second consecutive French Open final where he faced his former Bollettieri Academy mate Jim Courier. Courier emerged the victor in a dramatic rain interrupted five set final.
Agassi chose not to play at Wimbledon from 1988 90, and publicly stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event's traditionalism, particularly its "predominantly white" dress code which players at the event are required to conform to. Many observers at the time speculated that Agassi's real motivation was that his strong baseline game would not be well suited to Wimbledon's grass court surface. Agassi decided to play at Wimbledon in 1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about what he would wear he eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit. He reached the quarter finals on that occasion.
To the surprise of many, Agassi's Grand Slam breakthrough came at Wimbledon in 1992, when he beat Goran Ivani evi in a tight five set final.
Following wrist surgery in 1993, Agassi came back strongly in 1994 and captured the US Open, beating Michael Stich in the final. He then captured his first Australian Open title in 1995, beating Sampras in a four set final. He won a career high seven titles that year and he reached the World No. 1 ranking for the first time that April. He held it for 30 weeks on that occasion through to November. He compiled a career best 26 match winning streak during the summer hardcourt circuit, which ended when he lost in the US Open final to Sampras.
In 1995, Agassi won seven singles titles, the biggest being the Australian Open, the Cincinnati Masters, the Miami Masters, and the Canada Masters. In terms of win loss record, 1995 was Agassi's best year (72 10) (includes Davis Cup). This is slightly short of Sampras's best season, 1994, in which he (Sampras) won 77 matches and lost 12.
In 1996, Agassi won the men's singles Gold Medal at the Olympic Games in Atlanta, beating Sergi Bruguera of Spain in straight sets in the final. He also repeated at the Cincinnati Masters and the Miami Masters.
1997 was a poor year for Agassi. He won no top level titles and his ranking sank to World No. 141 in November. His form was perhaps affected by the intense publicity surrounding his high profile and turbulent relationship and marriage to actress Brooke Shields.
1998 2004
In 1998, Agassi rededicated himself to tennis. He shaved his balding head, began a rigorous conditioning program, and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in Challenger Series tournaments (a circuit for professional players ranked outside the world's top 50). Perhaps most remarkably, the one time rebel emerged as a gracious and thoughtful athlete, looked up to by younger players. After winning matches, he took to bowing and blowing a two handed kisses to spectators on each side of the court, a gesture seen as a rather humble acknowledgment of their support for him and for tennis.
In 1998, Agassi won five titles and leapt from No. 122 on the rankings at the start of the year, to No. 6 at the end of it, making it the highest jump into the Top 10 made by any player in tennis. He won five titles in ten finals, and finished runner up at the Miami Masters.
Agassi entered the history books in 1999 when he beat Andrei Medvedev in a five set French Open final to become only the fifth male player to have won all four Grand Slam singles titles (a feat last achieved in the 1960s by Roy Emerson). He followed this up by reaching the Wimbledon final, where he lost to Sampras. He then won the US Open, beating Todd Martin in five sets in the final, and finished the year ranked the World No. 1.
Agassi began 2000 by capturing his second Australian Open title, beating Yevgeny Kafelnikov in a four set final. He was the first male player to have reached four consecutive Grand Slam finals since Rod Laver achieved the Grand Slam in 1969. 2000 also saw Agassi reach the semi finals at Wimbledon, where he lost in five sets to Patrick Rafter in a very high quality battle considered by many to be one of the best matches ever played at Wimbledon . At the inaugural Tennis Masters Cup in Lisbon, Agassi made it all the way to the final after defeating Marat Safin 6 3, 6 3 in the semifinals to end the Russian's hopes to become the youngest World No. 1 in the history of tennis. Agassi eventually lost to Gustavo Kuerten 6 4, 6 4, 6 4. This loss allowed Kuerten to be crowned year end World No. 1. 2000 is considered by many of his fans to be a disappointing season for Agassi, as he managed to win only one tournament (2000 Australian Open).
Agassi opened 2001 by successfully defending his Australian Open title with a straight sets final win over Arnaud Clement. At Wimbledon, he battled Rafter again in the semi finals and lost 8 6 in the fifth set. At the US Open he lost in the quarter finals to Sampras in what is considered to be one of tournament's all time greatest matches. Sampras won 6 7, 7 6, 7 6, 7 6 in a match with no breaks of serve.
Agassi and Sampras' last duel came in the final of the US Open in 2002. The battle between the two veterans saw Sampras emerge victorious in four sets, and left Sampras with a 20 14 edge in their 34 career meetings. (The match in fact proved to be the last of Sampras' career. He did not play in an event on the professional tour again, and officially announced his retirement in 2003.) Agassi's US Open finish, along with his victories at the Miami Masters, Rome Masters, and Madrid Masters, helped him finish 2002 as the oldest year end No. 2 at 32 years and 8 months.
In 2003, Agassi won the eighth Grand Slam title of his career at the Australian Open, where he beat Rainer Sch ttler in straight sets in the final. In May that year, he recaptured the World No.1 ranking to become the oldest No. 1 ranked male tennis player in history at 33 years and 13 days. He held the No. 1 ranking on that occasion for 13 weeks. At the year end Tennis Masters Cup, he lost in the final to Roger Federer and finished the year ranked World No. 4.
In 2004, the 34 year old Agassi won the Cincinnati Masters to bring his career total to 59 top level singles titles and a record 17 ATP Masters Series titles. He became the second oldest singles champion in Cincinnati's storied history (the tournament began in 1899), surpassed only by Ken Rosewall who won the title in 1970 at age 35.
Agassi has also won one doubles title (at the Cincinnati Masters in 1993, partnering Petr Korda). He is one of only five male players to have won all the Grand Slams along with legends Don Budge, Roy Emerson, Rod Laver and Fred Perry. He is in fact the first male tennis player to win the four Grand Slams on four different surfaces. The previous players won the Australian Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open on grass courts and the French Open on clay courts whereas Agassi won the Australian Open on Rebound Ace, the French Open on clay, Wimbledon on grass, and the US Open on hardcourts. After winning French Open in 1999, Agassi became the first male tennis player to win the Career Golden Slam. Agassi also helped the United States win the Davis Cup in 1990 and 1992. He was named the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year in 1992. Agassi has earned more than US 30 million in prize money throughout his career, second only to Sampras. In addition to this, he also earns over US 25 million a year through endorsements, the most by any tennis player and fourth in all sports (first place is Tiger Woods at US 70 million a year).
2005
Agassi started off 2005 with strong runs, most of which were cut short by Roger Federer. He lost to Federer in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open and the semifinals at Dubai. He reached the quarterfinals at Indian Wells after a dominant victory over Guillermo Coria, but withdrew from his match with Lleyton Hewitt with a swollen big toe. Agassi lost in the semifinals at Miami to Federer in a tight match. Although the claycourt season is the toughest on the body, Agassi played in Rome and reached the semifinals which he lost to Coria in a tough battle. At the 2005 French Open, Agassi lost to Jarkko Nieminem, in their first round match after enduring back pain related to a pinched sciatic nerve. He lost in five sets with 6 0 in the fifth. After much media speculation about retirement, the 35 year old Agassi won in Los Angeles and made the final at Montreal before falling to world No. 2 Rafael Nadal in three long sets that he might have won if a few points had gone differently. His coach Darren Cahill and close friend and personal trainer Gil Reyes worked with Agassi throughout the summer to prepare for the 2005 US Open. Agassi made a spectacular run at the Open, beating Razvan Sabau 6 3, 6 3, 6 1, Ivo Karlovic in the second round 7 6(7 4), 7 6(7 5), 7 6(7 4) Tom Berdych 3 6, 6 1, 6 4, 7 6(7 2) and Xavier Malisse 6 3, 6 4, 6 7(5 7), 4 6, 6 2. His quarterfinal match against fellow American James Blake has been called one of the best matches in US Open history. After dropping the first two sets, 3 6, 3 6, Agassi took the next two, 6 3, 6 3. In the fifth set, Blake served for the match at 5 4, but Agassi broke his serve, then won the tiebreak 8 6 to secure the victory at 1:15 a.m. He defeated Robby Ginepri, another rising, talented American with a consistent baseline game, in his third consecutive five set match to earn a spot in the final against World No. 1 Roger Federer. After losing the first set 6 3, Agassi broke Federer twice to win the second, 6 2. He broke Federer again and at this point looked to be the better player. Agassi had a 30 love lead but with a few costly errors was broken to force a tiebreak, which Federer took, 7 1. Andre ran out of gas which allowed Federer to reel off five straight games. Being down 5 0 in the fourth set, Agassi held to make it 5 1 before Federer closed it out to win the championship. After the match, Agassi thanked New York for the 20 years of memories, hinting at potential retirement. However, Agassi has made clear that he will only retire on his terms, when he feels that he cannot perform at his best on the court. He will likely continue for another year, as he has qualified for the 2005 Masters Cup (which is limited to the eight best players in the world) and is scheduled to play the lead in tournament to the 2006 Australian Open.
Coming into the 2005 Masters Cup, Agassi is 29 5 on hard courts (with his only losses coming to Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal), and is 5 4 on clay (wins over Gasquet, Ljubicic, and Hrbaty, losses to Coria and Lopez).
In 2005, Agassi left Nike after 17 years and signed an endorsement deal with Adidas.
Hampered by a third degree ankle injury caused by several torn ligaments, Agassi lost his opening match against Nikolay Davydenko in the Masters Cup and was forced to withdraw. The withdrawal list also included Rafael Nadal, Andy Roddick, Lleyton Hewitt, and Marat Safin.
2006
Agassi withdrew from the Australian Open because of an ankle injury. Once he withdrew, he immediately requested a wildcard to enter the Delray Beach International Tennis Championships, where he eventually finished as a quarterfinalist losing to Guillermo Garcia Lopez 4 6, 2 6.
He was then forced to retire from SAP Open because of a lower back injury causing him severe pain in his lower back and down his legs.
He then played in the Dubai Open where he won in straight sets over Greg Rusedski in the first round before losing in straights to German Bjorn Phau in second round.
Health permitting, Agassi is scheduled to play tournaments in Indian Wells and Miami to close out the winter hardcourt season. Agassi has officially said that he is skipping the entire clay season, since it burdens his body. He will do his best to be ready for Wimbledon. However, Agassi's top priority in 2006 will once again be making yet another run at the US Open in August. Expect all scheduling decisons to be made with that goal in mind.
Playing style
Agassi employs a baseline style of play, but unlike most such players, he typically makes contact with the ball ''inside'' the baseline exceptionally difficult even for professionals. This is possible because of his short backswing, which also helps him return fast serves. He is also blessed with the best hand and eye coordination, rivaled only by Roger Federer. John McEnroe and others have called Agassi the best service returner ever to play professional tennis.
After Agassi's rededication to tennis in 1998, he has focused more on physical conditioning than in the past and is now one of the fittest players on the tour. His upper body strength allows him to bench press 350 lbs. He has remarkable endurance and rarely appears tired on court. As long as he is not injured, he handles long, grueling matches arguably better than any other player on the tour (even Roger Federer has been known to tire by the fifth set). Indeed, Agassi is often ready to start the next point when his opponent is catching his breath. One of his strategies is to wear down his opponents, continually putting pressure on them by returning the ball early and deep at angles. Agassi will try to stand in nearly one spot and hit the corners to make his opponent scramble. He will often pass up the winner and hit a slightly less aggressive shot to make his opponent run a little more to retrieve a few more shots. His penchant for running players around point after point has earned him the nickname "The Punisher".
Agassi's biggest weakness currently is his lack of consistent speed, and players who are able to consistently hit at sharp angles with pace give him trouble. Agassi used to be one of the fastest players on tour however, his recent injuries have forced him to consistently run his fastest selectively, usually in Grand Slams and Tennis Masters Series events. To make up for this recently adopted weakness, Agassi generally keeps his opponent on the defense. (Federer is the only player with a long winning streak against Agassi even Sampras lost to Agassi many times).
Personal and family life
After a four year courtship, Agassi married actress Brooke Shields in a lavish ceremony on April 19 1997. That February, they had filed suit against ''The National Enquirer'' claiming it printed "false and fabricated" statements: Brooke was undergoing counseling, binge eating and taking pills Agassi "lashed into" Brooke and he and Brooke's mother "tangled like wildcats" when she demanded a prenup the case was dismissed. Agassi filed for divorce, which was granted on April 9, 1999.
By the time the divorce was final, Agassi was dating the German tennis legend Steffi Graf. With only their mothers as witnesses, they were married at his home on October 22, 2001. Their son, Jaden Gil, was born 6 weeks prematurely on October 26 that year. Their daughter, Jaz Elle, was born on October 3 2003.
Agassi's older sister Rita married the former tennis legend Pancho Gonzales. In 1995, when Gonzales died in Las Vegas, Andre paid for his brother in law's funeral.
Andre has participated in many charity organizations, and founded the Andre Agassi Charitable Association, which assists the youth of Las Vegas. In 1995, he has won 1995's ATP Arthur Ashe's Humanitarian award in recognition of his efforts helping disadvantaged youth in LA.
The Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation has always and will continue to fund organizations which offer programs that consistently carry out the mission of the Foundation. The Foundation's mission is to provide educational and recreational institutions and activities for abandoned, abused, and at risk kids. The following organizations are fine examples:
The Andre Agassi Boys Girls Club
In 1997, Agassi opened the Boys Girls Club, a 25,000 square foot facility that features an indoor basketball court, outdoor tennis courts, a computer lab, library and teen centre. It sees as many as 400 children a day in the summer and well over 2,000 during the year.
Its junior tennis team, Team Agassi, includes mostly players with no previous tennis experience. As of January 2006, the team boasted four nationally ranked players as well as a number of regionally ranked players. Coached by Tim Blenkiron, the group practices regularly, attends study sessions, and often travels to play in various tournaments. The program also encourages members to respect each other and appreciate the challenges of winning and losing.
A basketball program, the Agassi Stars, began in 2000. Headed by Coach Jermone Riley, the Stars are required to attend study hall sessions, write to universities they might be interested in attending, and balance athletics and education.
The Foundation hopes to make these programs a college recruiting ground for kids with academic as well as athletic potential. In a community where drugs and gangs are prevalent forces, the Agassi Club promotes learning and gives kids a safe place to go after school.
Ethnicity question
Agassi's ethnicity, beyond being an American citizen, has been a subject of discussion by fans around the world. His father Mike Agassi is of Armenian and Assyrian ethnicity from the state of Iran, and there have been attempts to "claim" Agassi by both the Armenian and Iranian communities in the United States and abroad. Agassi has often seemed somewhat ambivalent, for example, joking after his "All Armenian" match against Sargis Sargsian at the US Open in 2004, "Well, I'm only half Armenian" . His father has written in his book, ''The Agassi Story'', about his experience of being an outsider in Muslim Iran, but Andre has also shown interest in the Iranian aspect of his heritage, in February 2005 expressing a desire to visit Iran, which holds "a special place" in his heart.
Quotes
About Pete Sampras' retirement: "You grow up with a guy, you compete against him for so long, he's such a big part of your career, something that's pretty special, so you do have that sense of personal regret that he's not around any more. You miss having that around."
During the 2005 US Open: "I've been motivated by overcoming challenge and overcoming the hurdles and obstacles that face me. There still is plenty out there to get motivated by."
(from Mats Wilander, asked to name the top 5 tennis players of all time he placed Agassi, Sampras, Federer, and Borg in the top 4 (in no order) and tied McEnroe, Lendl, and Connors for fifth place): ON AGASSI: He has some limitations, like he can t serve and volley, yet he has won all four Slams. He has a very high energy level, quite like Borg. He is on fifth gear from the very first point. There is some abnormality in his eyes, otherwise he wouldn t have had such a phenomenal return. He sees the ball like none else and just guides it wherever he wants to. He s just played a Grand Slam final at 35, that tells me he wasted the first five years of his career, otherwise he couldn t have lasted this long. No one has done more to tennis than Agassi and Borg.
Video games
''Andre Agassi Tennis'' for the SNES, Sega Genesis, Game Gear, and Mobile phone
''Agassi Tennis Generation'' for PS2 and GBA
''Smash Court Pro Tournament'' for PS2
Grand Slam record
Australian Open
'''Singles champion: 1995, 2000, 2001, 2003
Singles semi finalist: 1996, 2004
Singles quarter finalist: 2005
French Open
'''Singles champion: 1999
Singles finalist: 1990, 1991
Singles semi finalist: 1988, 1992
Singles quarter finalist: 1995, 2001, 2002, 2003
Doubles quarter finalist: 1992
Wimbledon
'''Singles champion: 1992
Singles finalist: 1999
Singles semi finalist: 1995, 2000, 2001
Singles quarter finalist: 1991, 1993
U.S. Open
'''Singles champion: 1994, 1999
Singles finalist: 1990, 1995, 2002, 2005
Singles semi finalist: 1988, 1989, 1996, 2003
Singles quarter finalist: 1992, 2001, 2004
Grand Slam finals
Wins (8)
'''Year''' '''Championship''' '''Opponent in Final''' '''Score in Final'''
1992 Wimbledon Goran Ivani evi 6 7, 6 4, 6 4, 1 6, 6 4
1994 US Open Michael Stich 6 1, 7 6, 7 5
1995 Australian Open Pete Sampras 4 6, 6 1, 7 6, 6 4
1999 French Open Andrei Medvedev 1 6, 2 6, 6 4, 6 3, 6 4
1999 US Open Todd Martin 6 4, 6 7, 6 7, 6 3, 6 2
2000 Australian Open Yevgeny Kafelnikov 3 6, 6 3, 6 2, 6 4
2001 Australian Open Arnaud Clement 6 4, 6 2, 6 2
2003 Australian Open Rainer Schuettler 6 2, 6 2, 6 1
Runner ups (7)
'''Year''' '''Championship''' '''Opponent in Final''' '''Score in Final'''
1990 French Open Andres Gomez 6 3, 2 6, 6 4, 6 4
1990 US Open Pete Sampras 6 4, 6 3, 6 2
1991 French Open Jim Courier 3 6, 6 4, 2 6, 6 1, 6 4
1995 US Open Pete Sampras 6 4, 6 3, 4 6, 7 5
1999 Wimbledon Pete Sampras 6 3, 6 4, 7 5
2002 US Open Pete Sampras 6 3, 6 4, 5 7, 6 4
2005 US Open Roger Federer 6 3, 2 6, 7 6, 6 1
Famous matches
US Open quarterfinal 1989: defeated Jimmy Connors 6 1, 4 6, 0 6, 6 3, 6 4. Agassi's first five set win. At one point during a changeover, Agassi joked to his box that he was losing sets on purpose to prove that he could win in five. The previous time he played Connors was at the 1988 US Open quarterfinal in which he beat Connors convincingly and did not lose a set.
French Open final 1990: lost to Andr s G mez 6 3, 2 6, 6 4, 6 4. Agassi's first Grand Slam final.
US Open final 1990: lost to Pete Sampras 6 4, 6 3, 6 2. The first of five Grand Slam finals contested by the top two players of their generation.
French Open final 1991: lost to Jim Courier 6 3, 4 6, 6 2, 1 6, 4 6. Blew 2 sets to 1 lead after rain delay. Many questioned if Agassi had the heart to win a major championship.
Wimbledon final 1992: defeated Goran Ivani evi 6 7(8), 6 4, 6 4, 1 6, 6 4. Agassi's first Grand Slam title occurring at the tournament no one thought he could ever win. Still his only Wimbledon championship.
Wimbledon quarterfinal 1993: lost to Pete Sampras 6 2, 6 2, 3 6, 3 6, 6 4. The first of only two 5 set matches between the two (The other was the 2000 Australian Open semis).
US Open 4th Round 1994: defeated Michael Chang 6 1, 6 7(3), 6 3, 3 6, 6 1. Outlasts Chang en route to becoming the first unseeded man to win the US Open championship in 28 years. Knocked off five seeded players along the way. First US Open title.
Australian Open 1995 final: defeated Pete Sampras 4 6, 6 1, 7 6(6), 6 4. Agassi's only Grand Slam Final victory over Sampras.
Atlanta Summer Olympics Gold Medal Match 1996: defeated Serge Bruguera 6 2, 6 3, 6 1. Demolished two time French Open Champion to achieve important personal goal of winning an Olympic Gold Medal.
French Open 1st round: lost to Marat Safin 7 5, 5 7, 2 6, 6 3, 2 6 in what was the Russian's first Grand Slam match. Safin's win foreshadowed his win over Pete Sampras in the 2000 US Open final.
French Open final 1999: defeated Andrei Medvedev 1 6, 2 6, 6 4, 6 3, 6 4. A spectacular come from behind victory that completed his career Grand Slam at the "advanced" age of 29, and his return to the top of tennis after being as low as 141. Referred to as the "Miracle in Paris". Agassi has stated that he considers this his greatest moment on a tennis court.
US Open final 1999: defeated Todd Martin 6 4, 6 7(5), 6 7(2), 6 3, 6 2. Another come from behind thriller.
Australian Open 2000 semi final: defeated Pete Sampras 6 4, 3 6, 6 7(0), 7 6(5), 6 1. En route to his second Australian Open crown. Tennis Magazine stated: "''This'' was Sampras Agassi for the ages."
Wimbledon semi final 2000: lost to Patrick Rafter 7 5, 4 6, 7 5, 4 6, 6 3. This match was universally praised for its asthetic beauty as the world's greatest baseliner battled the game's most fluid and athletic volleyer over five tense sets.
Australian Open 2001 semi final: defeated Patrick Rafter 7 5, 2 6, 6 7(5), 6 2, 6 3. Exacted some revenge for 2000 Wimbledon semi loss to Rafter. Rallied from 2 sets to 1 down to stun Rafter in front of an energized Australian crowd.
Wimbledon semi final 2001: lost to Patrick Rafter 2 6, 6 3, 3 6, 6 2, 8 6. Although not considered possible, the rematch topped the standard set by their encounter from the year before.
US Open 2001 quarter final: lost to Pete Sampras 6 7(9), 7 6(2), 7 6(2), 7 6(5). Match featured no breaks of serve. Many consider this the best Agassi Sampras match played.
US Open 2002 final: lost to Pete Sampras 6 3, 6 4, 5 7, 6 4. Sampras' final competitive match.
French Open 2003 2nd round: defeated Mario Ancic 5 7, 1 6, 6 4, 6 2, 7 5. Rallied back from two sets to love against the young and powerful Ancic to win the match. One of only six matches Agassi has won after being down two sets to love. Three of them have been at the French Open.
French Open 2004 1st round: lost to Jerome Haehnel 4 6, 6 7(4), 3 6. Shock first round loss to lowly French career journeyman. Arguably the greatest upset in French Open history.
US Open 2004 quarter final: lost to Roger Federer 3 6, 6 2, 5 7, 6 3, 3 6. 5th set marred by record breaking winds. By far Roger Federer's most difficult match en route to the title.
Australian Open 2005 4th round: defeated Joachim Johansson 6 7(4), 7 6(5), 7 6(3), 6 4. Won despite Johansson's world record 51 aces.
French Open 2005 1st round: lost to Jarkko Nieminen 5 7, 6 4, 7 6, 1 6, 0 6. Possibly Agassi's last match at the French Open. He led two sets to one heading into the fourth set, but a pinched sciatic nerve hampered Agasi's movement very noticeably. Agassi limped off the court with tears in his eyes after the match. The match was a major indicator to many that Agassi's career might be coming to a close soon.
US Open 2005 quarter final: defeated James Blake 3 6, 3 6, 6 3, 6 3, 7 6(6). Agassi had never come back from two sets down in the US Open. This was called the best match of the 2005 Open and one of the best in US Open history.
US Open 2005 semi final: defeated Robby Ginepri in his third consecutive five set thriller: 6 4, 5 7, 6 3, 4 6, 6 3. At 35 years old, he played his best tennis in the fifth set.
US Open 2005, final: lost to Roger Federer in his sixth US Open final. In the finale of Agassi's magic run at the Open which included 3 five set matches in a row, Agassi met Federer and appeared to have the upper hand, being up a break in the third set with the match tied at one set each. However, Federer withstood the pressure and rallied to beat Agassi 6 3, 2 6, 7 6(1), 6 1.
Tennis Masters Cup 2005, Round Robin: lost to Nikolay Davydenko 6 4, 6 2. Agassi was suffering from a sprained ankle injured while he was playing racquetball three weeks before. Although the match itself was unremarkable, the afterward was, when one of the tournament organizers absurdly accused Agassi of faking injury and losing on purpose because he (Agassi) was playing in Shanghai. It turned out that the same injury would cause Agassi to withdraw the 2006 Australian Open.
Titles (60)
bgcolor " eeeeee"
'''Legend (Singles)'''
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
Grand Slam (8)
bgcolor "ffffcc"
Tennis Masters Cup (1)
bgcolor "gold"
Olympic Gold (1)
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
ATP Masters Series (17)
bgcolor " ffffff"
ATP Tour (33)
Singles (60)
bgcolor " eeeeee"
'''No.'''
'''Date'''
'''Tournament'''
'''Surface'''
'''Opponent in the final'''
'''Score'''
1.
November 23, 1987
Itaparica, Brazil
Hard
Luiz Mattar (Brazil)
7 6 6 2
2.
February 15, 1988
Memphis, USA
Hard
Mikael Pernfors (Sweden)
6 4 6 4 7 5
3.
April 25, 1988
Charleston, USA
Clay
Jimmy Arias (USA)
6 2 6 2
4.
May 2, 1988
Forest Hills, USA
Clay
Slobodan Zivojinovic (Yugoslavia)
7 5 7 6 7 5
5.
July 11, 1988
Stuttgart Outdoors, Germany
Clay
Andres Gomez (Ecuador)
6 4 6 2
6.
July 25, 1988
Stratton, USA
Hard
Paul Annacone (USA)
6 2 6 4
7.
August 15, 1988
Livingston, USA
Hard
Jeff Tarango (USA)
6 2 6 4
8.
October 2, 1989
Orlando, Florida, USA
Hard
Brad Gilbert (USA)
6 2 6 1
9.
February 5, 1990
San Francisco, USA
Carpet
Todd Witsken (USA)
6 1 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
10.
March 12, 1990
Key Biscayne, USA
Hard
Stefan Edberg (Sweden)
6 1 6 4 6 6 2
11.
July 16, 1990
Washington, USA
Hard
Jim Grabb (USA)
6 1 6 4
bgcolor "ffffcc"
12.
November 12, 1990
Tour Championships, Frankfurt, Germany
Carpet
Stefan Edberg (Sweden)
5 7 7 6 7 5 6 2
13.
April 1, 1991
Orlando, USA
Hard
Derrick Rostagno (USA)
6 2 1 6 6 3
14.
July 15, 1991
Washington, USA
Hard
Petr Korda (Czechoslovakia)
6 3 6 4
15.
April 27, 1992
Atlanta, USA
Clay
Pete Sampras (USA)
7 5 6 4
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''16.'''
'''June 22, 1992'''
'''Wimbledon'''
Grass
Goran Ivani evi (Croatia)
6 7 6 4 6 4 1 6 6 4
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
17.
July 20, 1992
Toronto, Canada
Hard
Ivan Lendl (USA)
3 6 6 2 6 0
18.
January 2, 1993
San Francisco, USA
Hard
Brad Gilbert (USA)
6 2 6 7 6 2
19.
February 22, 1993
Scottsdale, USA
Hard
Marcos Ondruska (Russia)
6 2 3 6 6 3
20.
February 2, 1994
Scottsdale, USA
Hard
Luiz Mattar (Brazil)
6 4 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
21.
July 25, 1994
Toronto, Canada
Hard
Jason Stoltenberg (Australia)
6 4 6 4
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''22.'''
'''August 29, 1994'''
'''US Open'''
Hard
Michael Stich (Germany)
6 1 7 6 7 5
23.
October 17, 1994
Vienna, Austria
Carpet
Michael Stich (Germany)
7 6 4 6 6 2 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
24.
October 31, 1994
Paris, France
Carpet
Marc Rosset (Switzerland)
6 3 6 3 4 6 7 5
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''25.'''
'''January 16, 1995'''
'''Australian Open'''
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA)
4 6 6 1 7 6 6 4
26.
February 6, 1995
San Jose
Hard
Michael Chang (USA)
6 2 1 6 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
27.
March 13, 1995
Key Biscayne
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA)
3 6 6 2 7 6
28.
July 17, 1995
Washington
Hard
Stefan Edberg(Sweden)
6 4 2 6 7 5
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
29.
July 24, 1995
Montreal
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA)
3 6 6 2 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
30.
August 7, 1995
Cincinnati
Hard
Michael Chang (USA)
7 5 6 2
31.
August 14, 1995
New Haven
Hard
Richard Krajicek (Netherlands)
3 6 7 6 6 3
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
32.
March 18, 1996
Key Biscayne
Hard
Goran Ivani evi (Croatia)
3 0 40 0
bgcolor "gold"
33.
July 22, 1996
Olympic Games, Atlanta, USA
Hard
Sergi Bruguera (Spain)
6 2 6 3 6 1
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
34.
August 5, 1996
Cincinnati
Hard
Michael Chang (USA)
7 6 6 4
35.
February 9, 1998
San Jose
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA)
6 2 6 4
36.
March 2, 1998
Scottsdale
Hard
Jason Stoltenberg (Australia)
6 4 7 6
37.
July 20, 1998
Washington
Hard
Scott Draper (Australia)
6 2 6 0
38.
July 27, 1998
Los Angeles
Hard
Tim Henman (UK)
6 4 6 4
39.
October 19, 1998
Ostrava
Carpet
Jan Kroslak (Slovakia)
6 2 3 6 6 3
40.
April 5, 1999
Hong Kong
Hard
Boris Becker (Germany)
6 7 6 4 6 4
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''41.'''
'''May 24, 1999'''
'''French Open'''
Clay
Andrei Medvedev (Ukraine)
1 6 2 6 6 4 6 3 6 4
42.
August 16, 1999
Washington
Hard
Yevgeny Kafelnikov (Russia)
7 6 6 1
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''43.'''
'''August 30, 1999'''
'''US Open'''
Hard
Todd Martin (USA)
6 4 6 7 6 7 6 3 6 2
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
44.
November 1, 1999
Paris
Carpet
Marat Safin (Russia)
7 6 6 2 4 6 6 4
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''45.'''
'''January 17, 2000'''
'''Australian Open'''
Hard
Yevgeny Kafelnikov (Russia)
3 6 6 3 6 2 6 4
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''46.'''
'''January 15, 2001'''
'''Australian Open'''
Hard
Arnaud Clement (France)
6 4 6 2 6 2
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
47.
March 12, 2001
Indian Wells
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA)
7 6 7 5 6 1
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
48.
March 19, 2001
Key Biscayne
Hard
Jan Michael Gambill (USA)
7 6 6 1 6 0
49.
July 23, 2001
Los Angeles
Hard
Pete Sampras (USA
6 4 6 2
50.
March 4, 2002
Scottsdale
Hard
Juan Balcells (Spain)
6 2 7 6
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
51.
March 18, 2002
Key Biscayne
Hard
Roger Federer (Switzerland)
6 3 6 3 3 6 6 4
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
52.
May 6, 2002
Rome, Italy
Clay
Tommy Haas (Germany)
6 3 6 3 6 0
53.
July 22, 2002
Los Angeles, USA
Hard
Jan Michael Gambill (USA)
6 2 6 4
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
54.
October 14, 2002
Madrid, Spain
Hard
Jiri Novak (Czech Republic)
W O
bgcolor " e5d1cb"
'''55.'''
'''January 13, 2003'''
'''Australian Open'''
Hard
Rainer Schuettler (Germany)
6 2 6 2 6 1
56.
February 10, 2003
San Jose, USA
Hard
Davide Sanguinetti (Italy)
6 3 6 1
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
57.
March 17, 2003
Key Biscayne
Hard
Carlos Moy (Spain)
6 3 6 3
58.
April 21, 2003
Houston, USA
Clay
Andy Roddick (USA)
3 6 6 3 6 4
bgcolor " dfe2e9"
59.
August 2, 2004
Cincinnati, USA
Hard
Lleyton Hewitt (Australia)
6 3 3 6 6 2
60.
July 31, 2005
Los Angeles, USA
Hard
Gilles Muller (Luxembourg)
6 4 7 5
Doubles (1)
bgcolor " eeeeee"
'''No.'''
'''Date'''
'''Tournament'''
'''Surface'''
'''Partner'''
'''Opponents in the final'''
'''Score'''
1.
August 16, 1993
Cincinnati Masters
Hard
Petr Korda (Czech Republic)
Stefan Edberg (Sweden) Henrik Holm (Sweden)
7 6 6 4
Performance timeline
bgcolor " efefef"
! Tournament !! 2006 !! 2005 !! 2004 !! 2003 !! 2002 !! 2001 !! 2000 !! 1999 !! 1998 !! 1997 !! 1996 !! 1995 !! 1994 !! 1993 !! 1992 !! 1991 !! 1990
Australian Open
align "center"
align "center" QF
align "center" SF
align "center" '''W'''
align "center"
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" 4r
align "center" 4r
align "center"
align "center" SF
align "center" '''W'''
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
French Open
align "center"
align "center" 1r
align "center" 1r
align "center" QF
align "center" QF
align "center" QF
align "center" 2r
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" 1r
align "center"
align "center" 2r
align "center" QF
align "center" 2r
align "center"
align "center" SF
align "center" F
align "center" F
Wimbledon
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
align "center" 4r
align "center" 2r
align "center" SF
align "center" SF
align "center" F
align "center" 2r
align "center"
align "center" 1r
align "center" SF
align "center" 4r
align "center" QF
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" QF
align "center"
US Open
align "center"
align "center" F
align "center" QF
align "center" SF
align "center" F
align "center" QF
align "center" 2r
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" 4r
align "center" 4r
align "center" SF
align "center" F
align "center" '''W'''
align "center" 1r
align "center" QF
align "center" 1r
align "center" F
Grand Slam W L
align "center"
align "center" 10 2
align "center" 9 3
align "center" 19 3
align "center" 11 3
align "center" 20 3
align "center" 14 3
align "center" 23 2
align "center" 7 4
align "center" 3 1
align "center" 11 4
align "center" 22 3
align "center" 11 2
align "center" 4 2
align "center" 16 2
align "center" 10 3
align "center" 12 2
bgcolor " efefef"
'''Tournaments Won'''
align "center"
align "center" '''1'''
align "center" '''1'''
align "center" '''4'''
align "center" '''5'''
align "center" '''4'''
align "center" '''1'''
align "center" '''5'''
align "center" '''5'''
align "center" '''0'''
align "center" '''3'''
align "center" '''7'''
align "center" '''5'''
align "center" '''2'''
align "center" '''3'''
align "center" '''2'''
align "center" '''4'''
Hardcourt W L
align "center"
align "center" 19 3
align "center" 37 10
align "center" 32 6
align "center" 36 7
align "center" 35 10
align "center" 25 9
align "center" 41 9
align "center" 47 10
align "center" 11 10
align "center" 34 7
align "center" 53 3
align "center" 29 6
align quot center" 27 8
align "center" 19 7
align "center" 17 7
align "center" 26 5
bgcolor " efefef"
! Tournament !! 1989 !! 1988 !! 1987 !! 1986
Australian Open
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
align "center"
French Open
align "center" 3r
align "center" SF
align "center" 2r
align "center"
Wimbledon
align "center"
align "center"
align "center" 1r
align "center"
US Open
align "center" SF
align "center" SF
align "center" 1r
align "center" 1r
Grand Slam W L
align "center" 7 2
align "center" 10 2
align "center" 1 3
align "center" 0 1
bgcolor " efefef"
'''Tournaments Won'''
align "center" '''1'''
align "center" '''6'''
align "center" '''1'''
align "center" '''0'''
Hardcourt W L
align "center" 20 6
align "center" 33 6
align "center" 21 10
align "center" 4 5
Head to Head
vs. Sampras, Pete: 14 20
vs. Roddick, Andy: 5 1
vs. Ginepri, Robby: 4 0
vs. Blake, James: 4 1
vs. Dent, Taylor: 5 0
vs. Kiefer, Nicolas: 6 0
vs. Rusedski, Greg: 8 2
vs. Henman, Tim: 2 1
vs. Johansson, Thomas: 6 1
vs. Novak, Jiri: 5 1
vs. Gaudio, Gaston: 4 1
vs. Davydenko, Nikolay: 2 1
vs. Coria, Guillermo: 5 2
vs. Chang, Michael: 15 7
vs. Ivanisevic, Goran: 4 3
vs. Rafter, Patrick: 10 5
vs. Connors, Jimmy: 2 0
vs. McEnroe, John: 2 2
vs. Becker, Boris: 10 4
vs. Safin, Marat: 3 3
vs. Hewitt, Lleyton: 4 4
vs. Courier, Jim: 5 7
vs. Muster, Thomas: 5 4
vs. Federer, Roger: 3 8
vs. Nadal, Rafael: 0 1
vs. Grosjean, Sebastien: 4 3
vs. Nalbandian, David: 1 0
vs. Ferrero, Juan Carlos: 2 3
vs. Kuerten, Gustavo: 7 4
vs. Corretja, Alex: 5 3
vs. Costa, Albert: 4 1
vs. Moya, Carlos: 3 1
vs. Malisse, Xavier: 5 0
vs. Pioline, Cedric: 3 0
vs. Haas, Tommy: 6 3
External links
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
Agassi, Andre
bg:
da:Andre Agassi
de:Andre Agassi
et:Andre Agassi
es:Andre Agassi
fr:Andre Agassi
it:Andre Agassi
he:
nl:Andre Agassi
ja:
no:Andre Agassi
pl:Andre Agassi
pt:Andre Agassi
fi:Andre Agassi
sv:Andre Agassi
zh:
Agassi, Andre
The '''Austro Asiatic languages''' are a large language family of Southeast Asia and India. The name comes from the Greek words for South Asia. Among these languages, only Vietnamese, Khmer, and Mon have a long recorded history, and only Vietnamese and Khmer have official status (in Vietnam and Cambodia, respectively). The rest of the languages are spoken by minority groups.
Austroasiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across India and Southeast Asia, separated by regions where other languages are spoken. It is widely believed that the Austroasiatic languages are the autochthonous languages of Southeast Asia and eastern India, and that the other languages of the region, including the Indo European, Tai Kadai, and Sino Tibetan languages, are the result of later migrations of people. (There are, for example, Austroasiatic words in the Tibeto Burman languages of eastern Nepal.) Some linguists have attempted to prove that Austroasiatic languages are related to Austronesian languages, thus forming the Austric superfamily.
Linguists traditionally recognize two major divisions of Austroasiatic, the Mon Khmer languages of Southeast Asia and the Munda languages of east central and central India. Ethnologue identifies 168 Austroasiatic languages, of which 147 are Mon Khmer languages and 21 are Munda languages. However, no evidence for this classification has ever been published, and it remains speculative.
Each of the subdivisions of the classification below that is written in boldface type is accepted as a valid family. However, the relationships between these families within Austroasiatic is debated. It should be noted that little of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published, and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review. The classification used here is that of Diffloth (in press), which does not accept traditional Mon Khmer as a valid unit.
Munda languages (India)
: '''Koraput''' (7 languages)
: Core Munda languages
:: '''Kharian Juang''' (2 languages)
:: North Munda languages
::: '''Korku''' (1 language)
::: '''Kherwarian''' (12 languages)
Khasi Khmuic languages
: '''Khasian''' (3 languages) of eastern India and Bangladesh.
: Palaungo Khmuic languages
:: '''Khmuic''' (13 languages) of Laos and Thailand.
:: Palaungo Pakanic languages
::: '''Pakanic''' or '''Palyu''' (2 languages) of southern China
::: '''Palaungic''' (21 languages) of Myanmar, southern China, and Thailand, plus Mang of Vietnam.
Mon Khmer languages
: Khmero Vietic languages
:: Vieto Katuic languages
::: '''Viet Muong''' or '''Vietic''' (10 languages) of Vietnam and Laos, includes the Vietnamese language, which has the most speakers of any Austroasiatic language. These are the only Austroasiatic languages to have highly developed tone systems.
::: '''Katuic''' (19 languages) of Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand.
:: Khmero Bahnaric languages
::: '''Bahnaric''' (40 languages) of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia.
::: Khmeric languages
:::: The '''Khmer language''' of Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam.
:::: '''Pearic''' (6 languages) of Cambodia.
: Nico Monic languages
:: '''Nicobarese languages''' (6 languages) of the Nicobar Islands, a territory of India.
:: Asli Monic languages
::: '''Aslian''' (19 languages) of peninsular Malaysia and Thailand.
::: '''Monic''' (2 languages) includes the Mon language of Myanmar and the Nyahkur language of Thailand.
There are in addition several unclassified languages of southern China.
da:Austroasiatiske sprog
de:Austroasiatische Sprachen
es:Lenguas austroasi ticas
fi:Austroaasialaiset kielet
fr:Langues austroasiatiques
hu:Ausztro zsiai nyelvcsal d
id:Bahasa Austro Asia
ko:
lt:Austroazin s kalbos
nl:Austroaziatische talen
ru:
vi:H ng n ng Nam
zh:
REDIRECT Afro Asiatic languages
The '''Afro Asiatic languages''' constitute a language family of about 240 languages and over 307 million people widespread throughout North Africa, East Africa, the Sahel, and Southwest Asia. Other names sometimes given to this family include "Afrasian", "Hamito Semitic" (deprecated), "Lisramic" (Hodge 1972), "Erythraean" (Tucker 1966).
The following language subfamilies are included:
Berber languages
Chadic languages
Egyptian languages
Semitic languages
Cushitic languages
Beja language (subclassification controversial widely classified as part of Cushitic)
Omotic languages (controversial sometimes argued to be outside Afro Asiatic)
The Ongota language is often considered Afro Asiatic, but its classification within the family remains controversial, partly for lack of data. Harold Fleming tentatively suggests that it is an independent branch of non Omotic Afro Asiatic.
It is not generally agreed on where Proto Afro Asiatic was spoken Africa (e.g., Igor Diakonoff, Lionel Bender) has often been suggested, particularly Ethiopia, because it includes the majority of the diversity of the Afro Asiatic language family and has very diverse groups in close geographic proximity, often considered a telltale sign for a linguistic geographic origin. The western Red Sea coast and the Sahara have also been put forward (e.g., Christopher Ehret). Alexander Militarev suggests that their homeland was in the Levant (specifically, he identifies them with the Natufian culture).
The Semitic languages are the only Afro Asiatic subfamily based outside of Africa however, in historical or near historical times, some Semitic speakers crossed from South Arabia back into Ethiopia, so some modern Ethiopian languages (such as Amharic) are Semitic rather than belonging to the substrate Cushitic or Omotic groups. (A minority of academics, e.g. A. Murtonen (1967), dispute this view, suggesting that Semitic may have originated in Ethiopia.)
Tonal languages are found in the Omotic, Chadic, and South East Cushitic branches of Afro Asiatic, according to Ehret (1996). The Semitic, Berber and Egyptian branches are not tonal.
Common features and cognates
Common features of the Afro Asiatic languages include:
a two gender system in the singular, with the feminine marked by the t sound,
VSO typology with SVO tendencies,
a set of emphatic consonants, variously realized as glottalized, pharyngealized, or implosive, and
a templatic morphology in which words inflect by internal changes as well as prefixes and suffixes.
Some cognates are:
''b n '' "build" (Ehret: ''bn''), attested in Chadic, Semitic ('' bny''), Cushitic ( ''mn'' ''mn'' "house") and Omotic (Dime ''bin '' "build, create")
''m t'' "die" (Ehret: ''maaw''), attested in Chadic (eg Hausa ''mutu''), Egyptian (''mwt'', ''mt'', Coptic ''mu''), Berber (''mmet'', pr. ''yemmut''), Semitic ( ''mwt''), and Cushitic (Proto Somali ''umaaw'' '' am w(t) '' "die"), also similar to the Latin ''mortis'', indicating a possible vocabulary drift
''s n'' "know", attested in Chadic, Berber, and Egyptian
''l s'' "tongue" (Ehret: '' lis' ''"to lick"), attested in Semitic ( ''lasaan lisaan''), Egyptian (''ns'', Coptic ''las''), Berber (''ils''), Chadic (eg Hausa ''harshe''), and possibly Omotic (Dime ''lits' '' "lick")
''s m'' "name" (Ehret: ''sm'' ''sm''), attested in Semitic ( ''sm''), Berber (''ism''), Chadic (eg Hausa ''suna''), Cushitic, and Omotic (though the Berber form, ''ism'', and the Omotic form, ''sunts'', are sometimes argued to be Semitic loanwords.) The Egyptian ''smi'' "report, announce" may also be cognate.
''d m'' "blood" (Ehret: ''d m'' ''d m''), attested in Berber (''idammen''), Semitic ( ''dam''), Chadic, and arguably Omotic. Cushitic ''d m'' ''d m'', "red", may be cognate.
In the verbal system, Semitic, Berber, and Cushitic (including Beja) all provide evidence for a prefix conjugation:
English Arabic (Semitic) Kabyle (Berber)
Saho (Cushitic verb is "kill") Beja (verb is "arrive")
he dies ''yamuutu'' ''yemmut''
''yagdif '' ''iktim''
she dies ''tamuutu'' ''temmut''
''yagdif '' ''tiktim''
they (m.) die ''yamuutuuna'' ''mmuten''
''yagdif n'' ''iktimna''
you (m. sg.) die ''tamuutu'' ''temmuted''
''tagdif '' ''tiktima''
you (m. pl.) die ''tamuutuuna'' ''temmutem''
''tagdif n'' ''tiktimna''
I die ''amuutu'' ''mmute''
''agdif '' ''aktim''
we die ''namuutu'' ''nemmut'' ''nagdif '' ''niktim''
A causative affix ''s'' is widespread (found in all its subfamilies), but is also found in other groups, such as the Niger Congo languages.
The possessive pronoun suffixes are supported by Semitic, Berber, Cushitic (including Beja), and Chadic.
Classification history
Medieval scholars sometimes linked two or more branches of Afro Asiatic together already in the 9th century, the Hebrew grammarian Judah ibn Quraysh of Tiaret, Algeria perceived a relationship between Berber and Semitic (the latter being known to him through Arabic, Hebrew, and Aramaic.)
In the 1800's, Europeans began suggesting such relationships thus in 1844 Th. Benfey suggested a language family containing Semitic, Berber, and Cushitic (calling the latter "Ethiopic"). In the same year, T. N. Newman suggested a relationship between Semitic and Hausa, but this would long remain a topic of dispute and uncertainty. The traditional "Hamito Semitic" family was named by Friedrich M ller in 1876 in his ''Grundriss der Sprachwissenschaft'', and defined as consisting of a Semitic group plus a "Hamitic" group containing Egyptian, Berber, and Cushitic the Chadic group was not included. These classifications were partly based on non linguistic anthropological and racial arguments. (See also Hamitic hypothesis.)
Leo Reinisch (1909) proposed to link Cushitic and Chadic, while urging a more distant affinity with Egyptian and Semitic, thus foreshadowing Greenberg but his suggestion was largely ignored. Marcel Cohen (1924) rejected the idea of a distinct "Hamitic" subgroup, and included Hausa (a Chadic language) in his comparative Hamito Semitic vocabulary. Joseph Greenberg (1950) strongly confirmed Cohen's rejection of "Hamitic", added (and sub classified) the Chadic languages, and proposed the new name Afro Asiatic for the family his classification of it came to be almost universally accepted. In 1969, Harold Fleming proposed the recognition of Omotic as a fifth branch, rather than (as previously believed) a subgroup of Cushitic, and this has become generally accepted. Several scholars, including Harold Fleming and Robert Hetzron, have since questioned the traditional inclusion of Beja in Cushitic, but this view has yet to gain general acceptance.
There is little agreement on the subclassification of the five or six branches mentioned however, Christopher Ehret (1979), Harold Fleming (1981), and Joseph Greenberg (1981) all agree that Omotic was the first branch to split from the rest. Otherwise,
Ehret groups Egyptian, Berber, and Semitic together in a North Afro Asiatic subgroup
Paul Newman (1980) groups Berber with Chadic and Egyptian with Semitic, while questioning the inclusion of Omotic
Fleming (1981) divided non Omotic Afroasiatic, or "Erythraean", into three groups, Cushitic, Semitic, and Chadic Berber Egyptian he later added Semitic and Beja to the latter, and proposed Ongot as a tentative new third branch of Erythraean
Lionel Bender (1997) advocates a "Macro Cushitic" consisting of Berber, Cushitic, and Semitic, while regarding Chadic and Omotic as the most remote branches
Vladimir Orel and Olga Stolbova (1995) group Berber with Semitic, Chadic with Egyptian, and split Cushitic into five or more independent branches of Afro Asiatic, seeing Cushitic as a Sprachbund rather than a valid family
Alexander Militarev (2000), on the basis of lexicostatistics, groups Berber with Chadic and both, more distantly, with Semitic, as against Cushitic and Omotic.
See also
African languages
Etymological bibliography
Some of the main sources for Afro Asiatic etymologies include:
Marcel Cohen, ''Essai comparatif sur la vocabulaire et la phon tique du chamito s mitique'', Champion, Paris 1947.
Igor M. Diakonoff et al., "Historical Comparative Vocabulary of Afrasian", ''St. Petersburg Journal of African Studies'' Nos. 2 6, 1993 7.
Christopher Ehret. ''Reconstructing Proto Afroasiatic (Proto Afrasian): Vowels, Tone, Consonants, and Vocabulary'' (''University of California Publications in Linguistics 126''), California, Berkeley 1996.
Vladimir E. Orel and Olga V. Stolbova, ''Hamito Semitic Etymological Dictionary: Materials for a Reconstruction'', Brill, Leiden 1995. ISBN 9004100512.
Sources
Bernd Heine and Derek Nurse, ''African Languages,'' Cambridge University Press, 2000 Chapter 4
Merritt Ruhlen, ''A Guide to the World's Languages'', Stanford University Press, Stanford 1991.
Lionel Bender et al., ''Selected Comparative Historical Afro Asiatic Studies in Memory of Igor M. Diakonoff'', LINCOM 2003.
Russell G. Schuh, ''''.
(pdf), Roger Blench
External links
by Paul Newman (Requires Science Magazine subscription)
af:Afro Asiaties
ar:
bg:
bs:Afroazijski jezici
ca:Lleng es afroasi tiques
de:Afroasiatische Sprachen
es:Lenguas afroasi ticas
eo:Afrikazia lingvaro
eu:Hizkuntza Afroasiatikoak
fr:Langues afro asiatiques
ko:
id:Bahasa Afro Asia
ia:Linguas afro asiatic
he:
lt:Semit chamit kalbos
hu:Afro zsiai nyelvcsal d
nl:Afro Aziatische talen
ja:
nn:Afroasiatiske spr k
pt:L nguas afro asi ticas
sl:Afroazijski jeziki
fi:Afroaasialaiset kielet
sv:Afroasiatiska spr k
ta:
zh:
border 1 align right cellpadding 4 cellspacing 0 width 300 style "margin: 0 0 1em 1em background: f9f9f9 border: 1px aaa solid border collapse: collapse font size: 95 "
bigbig'''Principat d'Andorra'''br font
style "background: efefef " align "center" colspan "2"
border "0" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px" (Flag)
align "center" width "140px" (Coat of Arms)
align "center" colspan 2 small''National motto: Virtus Unita Fortiorbr (Latin: Virtue united is stronger)'' small
align "center" colspan 2 image:LocationAndorra.png
'''Official language''': Catalan
'''Capital''':br Population:br Coordinates: Andorra la Vellabr22,035 small(1990 est.) smallbr
'''French Co Prince''':
Jacques Chirac
'''Episcopal Co Prince''':
Joan Enric Vives Sic lia
'''Head of Government''': Albert Pintat
'''Area''':br Total: br water:
Ranked 178th br 468 km br Negligible
'''Population''':br Total (2003)br Density:
Ranked 182ndbr 69,150br 144.5 km
'''Independence''': 1278
'''National Day''': 8 September
valign top
'''Religions''': Roman Catholic (established religion)
'''HDI''' (2003) NA font color grayunranked font
'''Currency''': Euro small() small'''''' 100 cents
'''Time zone''' br in summer
CET (UTC 1)brCEST (UTC 2)
valign top
'''National anthem''': ''El Gran Carlemany, Mon Pare''
'''Internet TLD''': .ad
'''Calling Code''':
376
colspan "2" align "center" smallsup1 sup Prior to 1999: French franc and Spanish peseta. Some of their own currency, 1 diner of 100 centim was minted after 1982. small
The '''Principality of Andorra''' (Catalan: ''Principat d'Andorra'', French: ''Principaut d'Andorre'', Spanish: ''Principado de Andorra'') is a small, landlocked principality in south western Europe, located in the eastern Pyrenees mountains and bordered by France and Spain. Once isolated, it is currently a prosperous country mainly because of tourism and its status as a tax haven. Andorra is not to be confused with the Comune di Andora.
Origin and history of the name
The name "Andorra" probably originates from a Navarrese word ''andurrial'', which translates as ''shrub covered land''.
History
Tradition holds that Charlemagne granted a charter to the Andorran people in return for their fighting the Moors. Overlordship of the territory passed to the local count of Urgell and eventually to the bishop of the diocese of Urgell. In the 11th century a dispute arose between the bishop and his northern French neighbour over Andorra.
In 1278, the conflict was resolved by the signing of a parage, which provided that Andorra's sovereignty be shared between the French count of Foix (whose title would ultimately transfer to the French head of state) and the bishop of La Seu d'Urgell, in Catalonia. This gave the small principality its territory and political form.
Over the years the title passed to the kings of Navarre. After Henry of Navarre became King Henry IV of France, he issued an edict (1607) that established the head of the French state and the Bishop of Urgell as co princes of Andorra.
In the period 1812 13, the French Empire annexed Catalonia and divided it in four departments. Andorra was also annexed and made part of the district of Puigcerd (d partement of S gre).
In 1933 France occupied Andorra as a result of social unrest before elections. On July 12, 1934, an adventurer named Boris Skossyreff issued a proclamation in Urgel, declaring himself Boris I, sovereign prince of Andorra, simultaneously declaring war on the bishop of Urgel. He was arrested by Spanish authorities on July 20 and ultimately expelled from Spain. From 1936 to 1940, a French detachment was garrisoned in Andorra to prevent influences of the Spanish Civil War and Franco's Spain.
The Franco troops reached the Andorran border in the later stages of the war.
During the Second World War, Andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route between Vichy France and Spain.
In 1958 Andorra declared peace with Germany, having been forgotten on the Treaty of Versailles that ended the First World War and remaining legally at war.
Given its relative isolation, Andorra has existed outside the mainstream of European history, with few ties to countries other than France and Spain. In recent times, however, its thriving tourist industry along with developments in transportation and communications have removed the country from its isolation and its political system was thoroughly modernized in 1993, the year in which it finally became a member of the United Nations.
Politics
Until very recently, Andorra's political system had no clear division of powers into executive, legislative, and judicial branches. Ratified and approved in 1993, the constitution establishes Andorra as a sovereign parliamentary democracy that retains the co princes as heads of state, but the head of government retains executive power. The two co princes serve coequally with limited powers that do not include veto over government acts. They are represented in Andorra by a delegate.
The way in which the two princes are chosen makes Andorra one of the most politically distinct nations on earth. One co Prince is the man or woman who is currently serving as President of France, currently Jacques Chirac (it has historically been any Head of State of France, including Kings and Emperors of France). The other is the current Catholic bishop of the Catalan city of La Seu d'Urgell, currently Joan Enric Vives i Sicilia. As neither prince lives in Andorra their role is almost entirely ceremonial.
Andorra's main legislative body is the unicameral General Council of the Valleys (''Consell General de les Valls''), a parliament of 28 seats members are elected by direct popular vote, 14 from a single national constituency and 14 to represent each of the 7 parishes, with members serving four year terms. The Andorran government is formed by the General Council electing the Head of Government (''Cap de Govern''), who then appoints ministers to the cabinet, the Executive Council (''Govern''). Currently, government is held by the Liberal Party of Andorra, with Albert Pintat as Prime Minister. The Social Democratic Party is in opposition.
Defense of the country is the responsibility of France and Spain.
Administrative divisions
Andorra consists of seven communities, known as ''parr quies'' (singular ''parr quia'' ''Engl.:'' parish)
Andorra la Vella
Canillo
Encamp
Escaldes Engordany
La Massana
Ordino
Sant Juli de L ria
Geography
Befitting its location in the eastern Pyrenees mountain range, Andorra consists predominantly of rugged mountains of an average height of 1,996 m with the highest being the Coma Pedrosa at 2,946 m. These are dissected by three narrow valleys in a Y shape that combine into one as the main stream, the Valira river, leaves the country for Spain (at Andorra's lowest point of 870 m).
Andorra's climate is similar to its neighbours' temperate climate, but its higher altitude means there is on average more snow in winter and it is slightly cooler in summer.
Economy
Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's tiny, well to do economy, accounts for roughly 80 of GDP. An estimated 9 million tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorra's duty free status and by its summer and winter resorts. Andorra's comparative advantage has recently eroded as the economies of adjoining France and Spain have been opened up, providing broader availability of goods and lower tariffs.
The banking sector, with its tax haven status, also contributes substantially to the economy. Agricultural production is limitedonly 2 of the land is arableand most food has to be imported. The principal livestock activity is domestic sheep raising. Manufacturing output consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and furniture.
Andorra is not a full member of the European Union, but enjoys a special relationship with it, such as being treated as an EU member for trade in manufactured goods (no tariffs) and as a non EU member for agricultural products. Andorra lacks a currency of its own and uses that of its two surrounding nations. Prior to 1999 these were the French franc and the Spanish peseta, which have since been replaced by a single currency, the euro. Unlike other small European states that use the euro, Andorra does not yet mint its own euro coins in October 2004, negotiations between Andorra and the EU began on an agreement which would allow Andorra to mint its own coins. Andorra s natural resources include hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore, and lead.
Demographics
Andorrans constitute a minority in their own country only 33 of inhabitants hold Andorran nationality. The largest group of foreign nationals is that of Spaniards (43 ), with Portuguese (11 ) and French (7 ) nationals the other main groups. The remaining 6 belong to several other nationalities.
The only official language is Catalan, the language of the nearby Spanish autonomous region of Catalonia, with which Andorra shares many cultural traits, though Spanish, Portuguese and French are also commonly spoken. The predominant religion is Roman Catholicism.
Culture
Andorra's long history has provided it with a rich mythology and an abundance of folk tales, with roots originating in as far as Andalusia in the south and Netherlands in the north.
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Andorra
Civil unions in Andorra
Foreign relations of Andorra
Postal services in Andorra
Tourism in Andorra
Transportation in Andorra
See also
List of sovereign states
External links
Main portal
Andorra Inside Information
Information on various Andorran topics
Information on various Andorran topics
CIA's Factbook on Andorra
Official governmental site (in Catalan)
af:Andorra
ar:
an:Andorra
ast:Andorra
bg:
zh min nan:Andorra
be:
bn:
bs:Andora
ca:Andorra
cs:Andorra
cy:Andorra
da:Andorra
de:Andorra
et:Andorra
el:
es:Andorra
eo:Andoro
eu:Andorra
fr:Andorre
fy:Andorra
fur:Andorra
ga:And ra
gl:Andorra
ko:
hi:
hr:Andora
io:Andora
id:Andorra
ia:Andorra
is:Andorra
it:Andorra
he:
jv:Andorra
ka:
kw:Andorra
ku:Andorra
la:Andorra
lv:Andora
lt:Andora
lb:Andorra
li:Andorra
hu:Andorra
mk:
ms:Andorra
na:Andorra
nl:Andorra
nds:Andorra
ja:
no:Andorra
nn:Andorra
oc:And rra
ps:
pl:Andora
pt:Andorra
ro:Andorra
ru:
se:Andorra
sa:
sq:Andora
scn:Andorra
simple:Andorra
sk:Andorra
sl:Andora
sr:
fi:Andorra
sv:Andorra
tl:Andorra
th:
tr:Andorra
udm:
uk:
war:Andorra
zh:
fiu vro:Andorra
In mathematics and statistics, the '''arithmetic mean''' of a set of numbers is the sum of all the members of the set divided by the number of items in the set (cardinality). (The word ''set'' is used perhaps somewhat loosely for example, the number 3.8 could occur more than once in such a "set".) If one particular number occurs more times than others in the set, it is called a mode. The arithmetic mean is what pupils are taught very early to call the "average." If the set is a statistical population, then we speak of the '''population mean'''. If the set is a statistical sample, we call the resulting statistic a '''sample mean'''.
When the mean is not an accurate estimate of the median, the set of numbers, or frequency distribution, is said to be skewed.
The symbol (Greek: mu) is used to denote the arithmetic mean of a population.
If we denote a set of data by ''X'' ''x''sub1 sub, ''x''sub2 sub, ..., ''x''sub''n'' sub , then the sample mean is typically denoted with a horizontal bar over the variable (''x '', generally enunciated "''x'' bar").
In practice, the difference between and ''x '' is that is typically unobservable because one observes only a sample rather than the whole population, and if the sample is drawn randomly, then one may treat ''x '', but not , as a random variable, attributing a probability distribution to it.
Both are computed in the same way:
:math mathrm mean bar x (x 1 cdots x n) n. math
The arithmetic mean is greatly influenced by outliers. For instance, reporting the "average" net worth in Redmond, Washington as the arithmetic mean of all annual net worths would yield a surprisingly high number because of Bill Gates. These distortions occur when the mean is different from the median, and the median is a superior alternative when that happens.
In certain situations, the arithmetic mean is the wrong concept of "average" altogether. For example, if a stock rose 10 in the first year, 30 in the second year and fell 10 in the third year, then it would be incorrect to report its "average" increase per year over this three year period as the arithmetic mean (10 30 (10 )) 3 10 the correct average in this case is the geometric mean which yields an average increase per year of only 8.8 .
If ''X'' is a random variable, then the expected value of ''X'' can be seen as the long term arithmetic mean that occurs on repeated measurements of ''X''. This is the content of the law of large numbers. As a result, the sample mean is used to estimate unknown expected values.
Note that several other "means" have been defined, including the generalized mean, the generalized f mean, the harmonic mean, the arithmetic geometric mean, and the weighted mean.
Alternate notations
The arithmetic mean may also be expressed using the sum notation:
:math bar x frac1n sum i 1 n x i. math
See also
mean, average, summary statistics, variance, central tendency, standard deviation, inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, Muirhead's inequality
External links
cut the knot
Category:Statistics
Category:Means
! interwiki
ar:
cs:Aritmetick C3 BD pr C5 AFm C4 9Br
de:Mittelwert
es:Media aritm tica
fr:Moyenne arithm tique
hr:Aritmeti C4 8Dka sredina
nl:Rekenkundig gemiddelde
ja:
no:Gjennomsnitt
pl:rednia arytmetyczna
pt:M dia aritm tica
fi:Aritmeettinen keskiarvo
zh:
The '''American Football Conference''' ('''AFC''') is one of the two conferences of the National Football League (NFL). The AFC was created after the league merged with the American Football League (AFL) in early 1970. The NFL's Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers, and the then Baltimore Colts agreed to join the new AFC along with the 10 former AFL teams. All of the other NFL teams formed the National Football Conference (NFC). Initially, this alignment proved to be very unpopular with fans in these cities.
The AFC logo, shown to the right, is a variation of the old AFL logo . Introduced in 1970 alongside the beginning of the new AFC, the logo has basically remained unchanged since its introduction, though the "A" wasn't as bold when it was first introduced.
The AFC currently consists of 16 teams, organized into four divisions (North, South, East, and West) of four teams each. Each team plays the other teams in their division twice (home and away) during the regular season in addition to 10 other games teams assigned to their schedule by the NFL the previous May. Two of these games are assigned on the basis of the team's final record in the previous season. The remaining 8 games are split between the roster of two other NFL divisions. This assignment shifts each year. For instance, in the 2006 regular season, each team in the AFC East will play a game apiece against each team in both the AFC South and the NFC North. In this way division competition consists of common opponents, with the exception of the 2 games assigned on the strength of each team's prior season record. The NFC operates according to the same system.
At the end of each football season, there are playoff games involving the top six teams in the AFC (the four division champions by place standing and the top two remaining non division champion teams ("wild cards") by record). The last two teams remaining play in the AFC Championship game with the winner receiving the Lamar Hunt Trophy. The AFC champion plays the NFC champion in the Super Bowl.
Category:National Football League
da:American Football Conference
fr:American Football Conference
redirect applied mathematics
There have been two United States politicians named '''Albert Arnold Gore'''.
The father, Albert Gore, Sr., was a Senator from Tennessee from 1953 to 1971.
The son, Albert Gore, Jr. (often called simply "Al Gore") was both a Representative and a Senator from Tennessee, and was both a U.S. Vice President and a presidential candidate.
:''This article is about the former United States Vice President. For his father, see Albert Gore, Sr.''
class "toccolours" style "float: right margin: 0 0 1em 1em text align:left clear:right"
style "margin left: inherit font size: larger " '''Albert Arnold Gore, Jr.'''
align "center" colspan 2
! Order:
45th Vice President
! Term of Office:
January 20, 1993 to January 20, 2001
! Preceded by:
Dan Quayle
! Succeeded by:
Dick Cheney
! Date of Birth
March 31, 1948
! Place of Birth:
Washington, D.C.
! Wife:
Mary Elizabeth "Tipper" Gore
! Profession:
Journalist, Businessman
! Political Party:
Democrat
! President:
Bill Clinton
'''Albert Arnold Gore, Jr.''' (born March 31, 1948) is an American politician and businessman, who served as the 45th Vice President of the United States from 1993 to 2001.
He ran for President in 2000 following Bill Clinton's two four year terms. He was defeated in the Electoral College vote by the Republican candidate George W. Bush on a vote of 271 266 with a Gore committed Elector from Washington, DC abstaining. However, Gore did receive more individual votes than Bush. The election was bitterly contested, including multiple recounts and a 5 4 Supreme Court decision that effectively secured the election for President George W. Bush.
Gore currently serves as President of the American television channel Current and Chairman of Generation Investment Management, sits on the board of directors of Apple Computer, and serves as an unofficial advisor to Google's senior management.
Although speculation about a possible presidential run in 2008 still continues, he has stated that he does not currently plan to return to politics, but doesn't rule this possibility out in the future.
Early life
He attended the Sheridan School, and later the elite St. Albans School. In 1965, Gore enrolled at Harvard College, where he majored in government. His roommates (in Dunster House) were actor Tommy Lee Jones and former Columbia University women's basketball star Katie Day's father, Bart Day. Gore graduated from Harvard in June 1969 with a Bachelor of Arts degree.
:For more information on Gore's academic records, see
Family
Al Gore was born in Washington, D.C., to Albert A. Gore, Sr., a politician, and Pauline LaFon Gore, one of the first female lawyers to graduate from Vanderbilt Law School. Since his father was a veteran Democratic senator from Tennessee, Al Gore, Jr. divided his childhood between Washington, D.C., and Carthage, Tennessee.
During the school year, the younger Gore lived in a hotel in Washington, during summer vacations, he lived in Carthage, where he worked on the Gore family farm.
In 1970, Gore married Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson (Tipper Gore), whom he had first met many years before at his high school senior prom (St. Albans School in Washington, D.C.). They have four children: Karenna (born August 6, 1973), married to Drew Schiff Kristin (born June 5, 1977) Sarah (born January 7, 1979) and Al III (born October 19, 1982). The Gores also have two grandchildren: Wyatt (born July 4, 1999) and Anna Schiff.
The Gores now reside in Nashville, Tennessee, USA, and own a small farm near Carthage, Tennessee. The family attends New Salem Missionary Baptist Church in Carthage. The Gores in late 2005 bought a condo at San Francisco's swanky St. Regis.
Soldier and journalist
Although opposed to the Vietnam War, on August 7, 1969, Gore enlisted in the army to participate in the Vietnam War effort. After completing training as a military journalist, Gore shipped to Vietnam in early 1971, serving for four months before being given an honorable discharge. The chronology of Gore's military service is as follows:
'''August 1969''': Enlisted at the Newark, New Jersey recruiting office.
'''August to October 1969''': 8 weeks of basic training at Fort Dix, New Jersey
'''Late October 1969 to December 1970''': Fort Rucker, Alabama, on the job occupational training at the Army Flier newspaper.
'''January 1971 to May 1971''': field reporter in Vietnam, part of the 20th Engineer Brigade, stationed primarily at Bien Hoa Air Base near Saigon.
'''May 24, 1971''': Given an honorable discharge, after his early discharge request was granted.
Gore stated many times that he opposed the Vietnam War, but chose to enlist anyway. Some observers have noted that Gore could have avoided Vietnam in a number of ways. Gore considered all these options, but said that his sense of civic duty compelled him to serve. Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair suggest in ''Al Gore: A User's Manual'' that Gore joined the military for political gain.
Because Gore served as a journalist, he was never exposed to front line combat. Although some allege that his famous father's influence helped him to obtain this position, most military analysts agree that any man who enlisted with a Harvard degree had a good chance of being assigned a support specialty rather than an infantry position (even at the war's height, 88 of all servicemen were assigned to noncombatant specialties). However, Gore's decision to enlist for a two year term did mean that he would not be able to select his assignment, a choice which was available to three year enlistees. According to Newsweek journalist Bill Turque's biography ''Inventing Al Gore'' (which does not shy away from criticism and scandals, such as charging Gore with smoking marijuana far more frequently than he admits),
:''Dess Stokes, staff sergeant at the Newark Armed Forces Entrance and Examination Station on the day he walked in, doesn't remember any communication from superiors about Gore. A kid with Gore's background (a 134 IQ and a Harvard degree), he said, didn't need to be a senator's son with high level contacts to get the military job he wanted''.
Gore's father, Al Gore Sr., lost the 1970 election, and was no longer a Senator by the time Gore arrived in Vietnam, but was a Senator until January 1971 which included the time his son would have received his assignment. Some critics charge that his father's stature led Gore's superiors to give him less dangerous assignments than they might otherwise have given him. According to combat photographer H. Alan Leo, Gore was protected from dangerous situations at the request of Brigadier General Kenneth B. Cooper, the 20th Engineer Brigades Commander. Leo stated that Gore's trips into the field were safe, and that Gore "could have worn a tuxedo." These remarks seem to contradict Gore's many public statements
:"I carried an M 16. I pulled my turn on the perimeter at night and walked through the elephant grass and I was fired upon."(''Baltimore Sun'')
:"I took my turn regularly on the perimeter in these little firebases out in the boonies. Something would move, we'd fire first and ask questions later." (''Vanity Fair'')
:"I was shot at. I spent most of my time in the field." (''Washington Post'')
:"I used to fly these things (combat helicopters) with the doors open, sitting on the ledge with our feet hanging down. If you flew low and fast, they wouldn't have as much time to shoot you."(''Weekly Standard'')
For his part, Gore has stated that he knew Leo but rarely traveled with him in Vietnam, and that he never felt that he was being given special protection. On the other hand, Leo's testimony is that Cooper gave the orders before Gore arrived, so Gore would not know about them. The question of whether Leo frequently traveled with Gore or not still has not been conclusively answered.
Turque's book, however, states that
:'' Cooper said that he has no recollection of even meeting Leo, much less discussing Gore's safety with him. ...''
:''The evidence indicates that if there was an official effort to guarantee Gore's safety, it was uneven at best. His clippings from the Castle Courier, the newspaper of the U.S. Army Engineering Command, and other publications suggest that he pulled his weight, which in his case meant choppering around to report features about the good works of the 20th Engineers... When Smith said he was scheduled to leave for RR in Hawaii, the sergeant called for volunteers. Gore stepped up and spent a cold night in a foxhole. "Al did what everybody else did," said Mike O'Hara, the photographer who shot the Khe Sanh assignment...''
:''Regulations allowed for early release of personnel to teach or attend school if their services were deemed "not essential to the mission," and Gore certainly qualified. ''
Gore stated in 1988 that his experience in Vietnam
:''didn't change my conclusions about the war being a terrible mistake, but it struck me that opponents to the war, including myself, really did not take into account the fact that there were an awful lot of South Vietnamese who desperately wanted to hang on to what they called freedom. Coming face to face with those sentiments expressed by people who did the laundry and ran the restaurants and worked in the fields was something I was naively unprepared for''.
After returning from Vietnam, Gore spent five years as a reporter for the ''Tennessean'', a newspaper headquartered in Nashville, Tennessee. During this time, Gore also attended Vanderbilt Divinity School and Law School, although he did not complete a degree at either.
Congress
in the 1980s.
In the spring of 1976, Gore quit law school to run for the U.S. House, in Tennessee's fourth district. Gore defeated Stanley Rogers in the Democratic primary, then ran unopposed and was elected to his first Congressional post. He was re elected three times, in 1978, 1980, and 1982. In 1984 Gore did not run for the House instead he successfully ran for a seat in the Senate, which had been vacated by Republican Majority Leader Howard Baker. Gore served as a Senator from Tennessee until 1993, when he became Vice President.
House of Representatives
On March 19, 1979, Gore became the first person to appear on C SPAN, making a speech in the House chambers.
Senate
1988 Presidential Run
In 1988, Gore ran for President but failed to obtain the Democratic nomination, which went instead to Michael Dukakis.
Son's Accident and effect on 1992 Presidential run
On April 3, 1989, Gore's six year old son Albert was nearly killed in an automobile accident while leaving the Baltimore Orioles opening game. Because of this and the resulting lengthy healing process, his father chose to stay near him during the recovery instead of laying the foundation for a presidential primary campaign against eventual nominee Bill Clinton. Gore started writing ''Earth in the Balance'', his book on environmental conservation, during his son's recovery. ''Earth in the Balance'' became the first book written by a sitting senator to make ''The New York Times'' best seller list since John F. Kennedy's ''Profiles in Courage''.
Congressional Committees
While in Congress, Gore was a member of the following committees: Armed Services (Defense Industry and Technology Projection Forces and Regional Defense Strategic Forces and Nuclear Deterrence) Commerce, Science and Transportation (Communications Consumer Science, Technology and Space chairman 1992 Surface Transportation National Ocean Policy Study) Joint Committee on Printing Joint Economic Committee Rules and Administration.
Vice Presidency
Bill Clinton chose Gore to be his running mate on July 9, 1992, to the surprise of many as the two were both young and were from the same region of the nation. After winning the 1992 election, Al Gore was inaugurated as the 45th Vice President of the United States on January 20, 1993. Clinton and Gore were re elected to a second term in the 1996 election.
During his time as Vice President, Al Gore was mostly a behind the scenes player. However, many experts consider him to be one of the most active and influential Vice Presidents in U.S. history. This was evident as Gore had weekly lunches with Clinton to keep each other abreast of current developments, although he later said that it was he who insisted on having those weekly lunches in the first place.
Debate with Perot
In 1993 Gore debated Ross Perot on CNN's Larry King Live on the issue of free trade. Public opinion polls taken after the debate showed that a majority of Americans agreed with his point of view and supported NAFTA. Some claim that this performance may have been responsible for the passing of NAFTA in the House of Representatives, where it passed 234 200.
Initatives
One of Gore's major accomplishments as Vice President was the ''National Performance Review'', which pointed out waste, fraud, and other abuse in the federal government and stressed the need for cutting the size of the bureaucracy and the number of regulations. His book later helped guide President Clinton when he down sized the federal government.
Internet Education
As Vice President, Gore instituted a federal program calling for all schools and libraries to be wired to the Internet. This was a culmination of work that he had started several years before. While serving in the Senate, Gore had introduced legislation which called for the creation of a new federal research center for educational computing to support an "information systems highway".
Environment
During Gore's tenure as Vice President, he was a strong proponent for environmental protection. While a senator working on his book ''Earth in the Balance'', Gore had traveled around the world on numerous fact finding missions. On Earth Day 1994, Gore launched the worldwide GLOBE program, an innovative hands on, school based education and science activity that made extensive use of the Internet to increase student awareness of their environment and contribute research data for scientists.
The opinions he developed on issues such as global warming, the depletion of the ozone layer, and the destruction of rain forests is said to have played a major role in policy making for the Clinton administration. In the late nineties, Gore strongly pushed for the passage of the Kyoto Treaty, which called for reduction in green house emissions.
Foreign Policy
Because of President Clinton's inexperience and Gore's service in Vietnam and in the Senate, Clinton would often look to Gore for advice in the area of foreign policy. Gore was one of the first to call for action to remove Yugoslav President Slobodan Milo evi from power in 1998. Gore also supported Operation Desert Fox, a three day bombing campaign against Iraq that attempted to "degrade Saddam Hussein's ability to make and to use weapons of mass destruction."
.
Other
During the Clinton Gore administration, Americans enjoyed eight years of relative peace along with the longest economic expansion in history. Democrats attributed this prosperity to the policies of the Clinton Gore administration, and especially to the passage of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, for which Gore cast the tie breaking vote. During his 2000 campaign for the presidency, Gore attributed several positive economic results to his and Clinton's policies
2000 presidential election
.
After two terms as Vice President, Gore ran for President. In the Democratic primaries, Gore faced an early challenge from Bill Bradley. Gore's nomination was never really in doubt and Bradley withdrew from the race in early March 2000 after failing to win any state primary or caucus.
In August 2000, Gore surprised many when he selected United States Senator Joe Lieberman to be his vice presidential running mate. Lieberman, who is a more conservative Democrat than Gore, had publicly blasted President Clinton for the Monica Lewinsky affair. Many pundits saw Gore's choice of Lieberman as another way of trying to distance himself from the scandal prone Clinton White House. Lieberman was also the first Jewish nominee on a major party's national ticket.
During the entire campaign, Gore was neck and neck in the polls with Republican Governor of Texas George W. Bush. On Election Day, the results were so close that the outcome of the race took over a month to resolve, highlighted by the premature declaration of a winner on election night, and an extremely close result in the state of Florida. On election night, news networks first called Florida for Gore, then Fox News decided to call it for Bush and all of the other news stations followed their decision.
The race was ultimately decided by a razor thin margin of only 537 popular votes in Florida, a state favored to have gone to Bush (as his brother served as Governor). The 537 number was an astonishingly close margin out of some 105 million votes cast nationwide. Florida's 25 electoral votes were awarded to George W. Bush only after numerous court challenges. Al Gore publicly conceded the election after the Supreme Court in ''Bush v. Gore'' voted 7 to 2 to declare the ongoing recount procedure unconstitutional because it feared that different standards would be used in different parts of the state, and 5 to 4 to ban recounts using other procedures. during the 2000 election as George W. Bush looks on. Gore strongly disagreed with the Court's decision, but decided "for the sake of our unity of the people and the strength of our democracy, I offer my concession." He had previously made a concession phone call to Bush the night of the election, but quickly retracted it after learning just how close the election was. Following the election, a subsequent recount conducted by various U.S. news media organizations indicated that Mr. Bush would have won using the partial recount method of 4 strongly Democratic areas advocated by Mr. Gore, but that Mr. Gore would have won given a full recount of the state. .
The states that ultimately voted for Gore over Bush in the 2000 elections were New York, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Vermont, Massachusetts, Washington, D.C., Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, New Mexico, California, Oregon, Washington, Illinois, Iowa, Maryland, Minnesota and Hawaii giving Gore 267 electoral votes to Bush's 271. One of Gore's electors cast a blank ballot, to protest what she called DC's "colonial status", thus the candidate's final number of electoral votes was 266.
The Florida election has been closely scrutinized since the election. Critics have argued that the Governor of Florida, Jeb Bush (Brother of George W. Bush) and the Secretary of State of Florida, Katherine Harris, did play a part in ensuring that the state was in the red column of the Republicans come election day. Several irregularities are thought to have favored Bush others may have given Gore an edge. Irregularities favoring Bush included the notorious Palm Beach "butterfly ballots", which were alleged to have produced an unexpectedly large number of votes for Reform Party candidate Pat Buchanan, and a purge of some 50,000 alleged felons from the Florida voting rolls that included some voters who were again eligible to vote under Florida law. Many Bush supporters, however, believed that an unfair advantage was given to Gore when all major news networks, early on, prematurely projected Gore as the winner of Florida's 25 electoral votes at 7:52 PM Eastern Time. This happened before the polls closed in 10 Florida counties in the heavily Republican western panhandle which are in the Central Time Zone, and thus closed at 7 PM Central Time (8 PM Eastern). Some have thought that this depressed the pro Bush vote in that area. It is unclear what effect, if any, this may have had. And while the Gore camp fought (with some success) to keep overseas absentee votes out in counties thought to be pro Bush, Bush operatives similarly (albeit while drawing less attention to their efforts) prevented the counting of overseas absentee votes in strong Democratic counties. Both sides contended that the votes were cast after Election Day, and since many of the envelopes did not have cancelled stamps, it was not clear when the votes were cast. Reports later surfaced that many overseas voters attempted to vote only after learning of the closeness of the Florida vote.
Some commentators still see such irregularities, and the legal maneuvering around the recounts as casting doubt on the legitimacy of the vote as a matter of law, however, the issue was settled, albeit controversially again, when the U.S. Congress accepted Florida's electoral delegation, only after a challenge to the Florida electors was presented in the congressional chambers on January 6, 2001 by members of the Congressional Black Caucus. Member after member went up decrying the lack of a senator who would be willing to co sponsor the challenge without any effect. They thus failed to bring the challenge to a debate.
Concern about the possible disenfranchisement of voters in the Florida vote led to widespread calls for electoral reform in the United States, and ultimately to the passage of the Help America Vote Act, which authorized the United States federal government to provide funds to the states to replace their mechanical voting equipment with electronic voting equipment. However, this has led to new controversies, because of the security weaknesses of the computer systems, the lack of paper based methods of secure verification, and the necessity to rely on the trustworthiness of the manufacturers whose employees also count those votes.
Although Gore won the nationwide popular vote by more than 500,000 votes, he lost the election by five electoral votes (with one D.C. elector, pledged to Gore, casting a blank ballot to protest the District's lack of representation in Congress).
on Futurama.
Joe Lieberman later criticized Al Gore for adopting a populist theme during their 2000 campaign. Lieberman said he objected to Gore's "people vs. the powerful" message, believing it was not the best strategy for Democrats to use to recapture the White House.
While running for president in 2000, Al Gore was used as a voice actor for the television show ''Futurama'' (for which his daughter, Kristin, was a writer). He played himself again in another episode after the campaign was over.
Private citizen
Professor Gore
.
Following his election loss, Gore accepted visiting professorships at Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism, Middle Tennessee State University, University of California Los Angeles, and Fisk University. In late 2001, Al Gore became a Senior Advisor to Google and Vice Chairman of Los Angeles based financial firm Metropolitan West Financial LLC.
Blasting Bush
On September 23, 2002, Gore spoke in San Francisco to The Commonwealth Club and made a controversial speech blasting Bush on the Iraq war has stored secret supplies of biological and chemical weapons throughout his country. Iraq's search for weapons of mass destruction has proven impossible to deter and we should assume that it will continue for as long as Saddam is in power" He also spoke against rushing to war with Iraq, advising caution and saying that Iraq was a diversion from fighting Al Qaeda and terrorism in Afghanistan and elsewhere: "I don't think that we should allow anything to diminish our focus on avenging the 3,000 Americans who were murdered and dismantling the network of terrorists who we know to be responsible for it. The fact that we don't know where they are should not cause us to focus instead on some other enemy whose location may be easier to identify."
Following the November 5, 2002, midterm elections Gore re emerged into the public eye with a 14 city book tour and a well orchestrated "full Gore" media blitz which included a pair of policy speeches. On September 23, Gore delivered a speech on the impending War with Iraq and the War on Terrorism that generated a fair amount of commentary. Less than two weeks later, on October 2, he made a speech on Bush's handling of the economy to the Brookings Institution. Also, during this time period Gore guest starred on several programs such as The Late Show with David Letterman and Saturday Night Live (with legendary rock band Phish), appearing much more relaxed and funnier as a private citizen than he did while holding public office.
'' along side ''West Wing'' stars Martin Sheen and John Spencer.
In 2003 Gore joined the board of directors of Apple Computer. On the political front, Gore kept his promise of staying involved in public debate when he offered his criticism and advice to the Bush Administration on key topics such as the Occupation of Iraq, USA Patriot Act, and environmental issues, most notably global warming. Gore also continued to visit campuses across the nation lecturing on issues such as race, media, and democracy.
On April 10, 2004, Gore met with the 9 11 Commission in private to give his testimony on what his administration did to prevent terror attacks. In a statement after the three hour session, the commission said he was candid and forthcoming, and it thanked him for his "continued cooperation."
In the summer of 2004, Gore teamed up with MoveOn.org, to promote the new science fiction film, ''The Day After Tomorrow''. Although Gore said the movie was a far fetched example of global warming, he said the movie would escalate public debate on the issue.
On April 27, 2005, Gore gave an hour long speech lambasting the GOP's effort to do away with the legislative filibuster. In response to Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, who for weeks had repeated threats to impose the "nuclear option" if Senate Democrats did not stop blocking judicial nominees via the filibuster, Gore said, "Their grand design is an all powerful executive using a weakened legislature to fashion a compliant judiciary in its own image. The Senate has confirmed 205 or over 95 of President Bush's nominees. Democrats have held up only 10 nominees, less than 5 . Compare that with the 60 Clinton nominees who were blocked by Republican obstruction between 1995 and 2000. What is involved here is a power grab," Gore said. Gore also took aim at what he called "religious zealots" who claim special knowledge of God's will in American politics. He went on to say, "They even claim that those of us who disagree with their point of view are waging war against people of faith. How dare they!" This was Gore's first major policy speech of 2005 and also the first one since the defeat of Democratic hopeful John Kerry in late 2004.
In May 2005, Gore was awarded a lifetime achievement award for three decades of contributions to the Internet. The Webby Awards, which are widely hailed as the ''Oscars'' of the web, "wanted to set the record straight" about Al Gore and the Internet once and for all. Tiffany Shlain, the awards' founder and chairwoman said, "It's just one of those instances someone did amazing work for three decades as congressman, senator and vice president and it got spun around into this political mess," Shlain said.
In September 2005, Gore chartered two aircraft to evacuate 270 evacuees from New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. He was highly critical of the government and federal response in the days after the hurricane.
Future
Speaking at an economic forum in Stockholm, Sweden, in October 2005, Gore again stated that he has no intention of ever running for president again in response to questions from reporters. However, Gore said he could not rule the possibility out completely saying, "I do not completely rule out some future interest, but I do not expect to have that." When asked how the United States would have been different if he had become president, Gore stated, "We would not have invaded a country that didn't attack us," he said, referring to Iraq. "We would not have taken money from the working families and given it to the most wealthy families." "We would not be trying to control and intimidate the news media. We would not be routinely torturing people," Gore said.
In the past few years, Gore has remained busy traveling the world speaking and participating in events mainly aimed towards global warming awareness and prevention.
On January 2006, Al Gore delivered a major speech criticising President Bush's use of domestic wiretaps. Gore stated that Bush broke the law and recommended an independent counsel investigate the matter further. Also in January 2006, Al Gore was the leading man in the Sundance global warming documentary ''An Inconvenient Truth''.
Al Gore will be publishing a second book on global warming titled "An Inconvenient Truth" in April 2006.
On February 12, 2006: Former US vice president Al Gore on Sunday said that the US government had committed terrible abuses against Arabs living in America after 9 11 attacks, and that most Americans did not support such treatment.
The thoughtless way in which visas are now handled, that is a mistake, Mr Gore said at the Jeddah Economic Forum. The worst thing we can possibly do is to cut off the channels of friendship and mutual understanding between Saudi Arabia and the United States.
The former US vice president told this Saudi audience, many of them educated in US universities, that Arabs in the United States had been indiscriminately rounded up, often on minor charges of overstaying a visa or not having a green card in proper order, and held in conditions that were just unforgivable.
Unfortunately there have been terrible abuses and it s wrong. I do want you to know that it does not represent the desires or wishes or feelings of the majority of the citizens of my country.
Terrence Jeffrey of Human Events and Jack Kelly of RealClearPolitics.com however criticized Gore's comments, and pointed out that 9 11 Commission (page 492) reported that Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who planned the attacks, told interrogators most of the hijackers he selected were Saudis because they had the easiest time getting visas. Mohammad Atta himself was in the United States, having overstayed his visa.
Television network
On May 4, 2004, INdTV Holdings, a company co founded by Gore and Joel Hyatt, purchased cable news channel NewsWorld International from Vivendi Universal. The new network will not have political leanings, Gore said, but will serve as an "independent voice" for a target audience of people between 18 and 34 "who want to learn about the world in a voice they recognize and a view they recognize as their own." The network was relaunched under the name Current on August 1, 2005.
Investment firm
In late 2004, it was announced that Al Gore had launched and will chair an investment firm to seek out companies taking a responsible view on big global issues like climate change.
Gore's group, Generation Investment Management, was created to assist the growing demand for an investment style which can bring returns by blending traditional equity research with a focus on more intangible non financial factors such as social and environmental responsibility and corporate governance.
2004 presidential election
Endorsing Dean
Initially, Al Gore was touted as a logical opponent of George W. Bush in the 2004 United States Presidential Election. ! "Re elect Gore!" was a common slogan among many Democrats who felt the former Vice President had been unfairly cheated out of the presidency, on the grounds that he had won the popular vote and (in the opinion of many) should have won the Electoral College vote. On December 16, 2002 however, Gore announced that he would not run in 2004, saying that it was time for "fresh faces" and "new ideas" to emerge from the Democrats. When he appeared on a ''60 Minutes'' interview, Gore said that he felt if he had run, the focus of the election would be the rematch rather than the issues. Gore's former running mate, Joe Lieberman quickly announced his own candidacy for the presidency, which he had vowed he would not do if Gore ran.
Despite Gore taking himself out of the race, a handful of his supporters formed a national campaign to "draft" him into running. However, that effort largely came to an end when Gore publicly endorsed Vermont Governor Howard Dean (over his former running mate Joe Lieberman) weeks before the first primary of the election cycle. There was still some effort to encourage write in votes for Gore in the primaries by a different group of Gore supporters who were separate from the draft movement. Although Gore did receive a small number of votes in New Hampshire and New Mexico, that effort was halted when John Kerry pulled into the lead for the nomination. Gore's endorsement of Dean was helpful to the latter in legitimizing him in the eyes of the establishment faction of the Democratic Party, but it also led the media to dub Dean as the clear front runner, with the result that his opponents devoted more of their emphasis to opposing him.
Campaigning against Bush
On January 15, 2004, Al Gore gave a major policy address in New York City on climate change and the Bush administration's approach to the environment. Accompanied by slides and projector, Gore slammed the Bush administration's attitude towards global warming saying, "There are many who still do not believe that global warming is a problem at all. And it's no wonder: because they are the targets of a massive and well organized campaign of disinformation lavishly funded by polluters who are determined to prevent any action to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming, out of a fear that their profits might be affected if they had to stop dumping so much pollution into the atmosphere."
On February 9, 2004, on the eve of the Tennessee primary, Gore gave what many consider his harshest criticism of the president yet when he accused George W. Bush of betraying the country by using the 9 11 attacks as a justification for the invasion of Iraq. "He betrayed this country!" Mr. Gore shouted into the microphone. "He played on our fears! He took America on an ill conceived foreign adventure dangerous to our troops, an adventure preordained and planned before 9 11 ever took place!" Gore also urged all Democrats to unite behind their eventual nominee proclaiming, "Any one of these candidates is far better than George W. Bush." In March 2004 Gore, along with former Presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter, united behind Kerry as the presumptive Democratic nominee.
On April 28, 2004, Gore announced that he would be donating 6 million to various Democratic Party groups. Drawing from his funds left over from his 2000 presidential campaign, Gore pledged to donate 4 million to the Democratic National Committee. The party's Senate and House committees would each get 1 million, and the party from Gore's home state of Tennessee would receive 250,000. In addition, Gore announced that all of the surplus funds in his "Recount Fund" from the 2000 election controversy that resulted in the Supreme Court halting the counting of the ballots, a total of 240,000, will be donated to the Florida Democratic Party.
In his speech, Gore stressed the importance of voting and having every vote counted, a point that foreshadowed the 2004 U.S. election voting controversies.
On May 26, 2004, Gore gave a highly critical speech on the Iraq crisis and the Bush Administration. In the speech, Gore demanded Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice, Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Douglas Feith, and Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Stephen Cambone all resign for encouraging policies that led to the abuse of Iraqi prisoners and fanned hatred of Americans abroad. During the fiery speech, which lasted more than an hour, Gore called the Bush administration's Iraq war plan "incompetent" and called George W. Bush the most dishonest president since Richard Nixon, who resigned the office of the presidency in 1974 following the Watergate scandal.
Gore also decried the abuse of prisoners in Abu Ghraib Prison in Iraq, saying, "What happened at that prison, it is now clear, is not the result of random acts of a few bad apples. It was the natural consequence of the Bush Administration policy."
Convention
As the first major speaker at the 2004 Democratic National Convention, Gore held himself out as a living reminder that every vote counts. "Let's make sure not only that the Supreme Court does not pick the next president, but also that this president is not the one who picks the next Supreme Court," said Gore. Gore directed remarks to supporters of third party presidential candidate Ralph Nader, who abandoned the Democratic Party four years ago, asking them, "Do you still believe that there was no difference between the candidates?"
Post Convention
On October 18, 2004, Al Gore delivered his final major policy speech of the 2004 political season. In an hour long presentation, Gore concluded that, "I'm convinced that most of the president's frequent departures from fact based analysis have much more to do with right wing political and economic ideology than with the Bible."
Views and controversies
Gore is a strong supporter of abortion rights, free trade, and strong environmental policy. He was a vocal opponent of the 2003 invasion of Iraq .
Gore has gradually moved politically further left he was once a moderate to conservative lawmaker. While in Congress, Gore had a strong pro life record on abortion and voted pro life 27 times. When exactly Gore became pro choice is unknown, but by 1988, when he sought the Democratic presidential nomination, he was on record as opposing the criminalization of abortion.
Critics have charged Gore with illegal fundraising at a Buddhist temple and illegal use of his government office and telephone for political fundraising in violation of the Hatch Act, although he was never indicted on such a charge.
The Internet
Gore is a frequent target of satire, based on his supposedly having claimed to have invented the Internet. In fact he never made such a claim . Rather, during an interview with Wolf Blitzer on CNN's "Late Edition" on March 9, 1999, Gore stated:
: During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the Internet. I took the initiative in moving forward a whole range of initiatives that have proven to be important to our country's economic growth and environmental protection, improvements in our educational system .
The phrase from the statement above which sparked the debate, "I took the initiative in creating the Internet," referred to Gore's involvement with and sponsorship of the ''High Performance Computing Act of 1991'' which advanced the growth and mainstreaming of the Internet during the 1990s .
This statement was later defended by Internet pioneers Robert Kahn and Vinton Cerf :
: ...as the two people who designed the basic architecture and the core protocols that make the Internet work, we would like to acknowledge VP Gore's contributions as a Congressman, Senator and as Vice President. No other elected official, to our knowledge, has made a greater contribution over a longer period of time.
Accusations of hypocrisy by McClellan and Gonzales
On the 16th of January, 2006, Gore accused U.S. President Bush of "breaking the law repeatedly and insistently," and called for a special investigation of NSA spying on Americans because the spying was without a warrant from a special federal court that authorizes such requests to eavesdrop on Americans.
Bush press secretary Scott McClellan and Attorney General Alberto Gonzales both responded to reporters that the Clinton Gore administration had done illegal warrantless physical searches themselves of Aldrich Ames without permission from a judge.
"I think his hypocrisy knows no bounds," McClellan said of Gore. But the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act at the time did not cover physical searches. The law had changed in 1995. Gore claimed that because Gonzales made a "political defense" for Bush, he was no longer eligible to review charges against Bush and therefore must name a special counsel.
"His charges are factually wrong," said Gore, "Both before and after the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act was amended in 1995 the Clinton Gore administration complied fully and completely with the terms of the law."
See also
Al Gore Television Credits
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, (August 1, 2005)
Saturday Night Live, (December 14, 2002)
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, (November 27, 2002)
Futurama, "Crimes of the Hot", (November 10, 2002)
Seven Days, "Stairway to Heaven", (October 11, 2000)
The Late Show with David Letterman, (September 14, 2000)
Futurama, "Anthology of Interest I", (May 21, 2000)
Larry King Live, (April 20, 2000)
Mad About You, "Breastfeeding", (January 6, 1998)
Late Show with David Letterman, (September 8, 1993)
External links
"The SNS Project" and
General sites
Recent speeches by Al Gore
( )
Al Gore's Current
Al Gore and the Internet
Al Gore myths and media bias
Al Gore's early career in journalism
succession box
title Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Tennessee's 4th District
before Joe L. Evins
after Jim Cooper
years 1977 1985
U.S. Senator box
state Tennessee
class 2
before Howard H. Baker Jr.
after Harlan Mathews
alongside James R. Sasser
years 1985 1993
succession box
title Democratic Party vice presidential candidate
before Lloyd Bentsen
after Joe Lieberman
years 1992 (won), 1996 (won)
succession box
title Vice President of the United States
before Dan Quayle
after Dick Cheney
years January 20, 1993 January 20, 2001
succession box
title Democratic Party presidential candidate
before Bill Clinton
after John Kerry
years 2000 (lost)
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Al Gore
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Al
Gore, Al
Gore, Al
Gore, Al
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Al
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
Gore, Albert Arnold Jr.
cs:Al Gore
da:Al Gore
de:Al Gore
es:Al Gore
fr:Al Gore
hr:Al Gore
id:Al Gore
it:Al Gore
he:
nl:Al Gore
ja:
pl:Al Gore
pt:Al Gore
simple:Al Gore
sk:Al Gore
fi:Al Gore
sv:Al Gore
zh:
'''Animal Farm''' is a satirical novel (which can also be understood as a modern fable or allegory) by George Orwell, ostensibly about a group of animals who oust the humans from the farm they live on and run it themselves, only to have it corrupted into a brutal tyranny on its own. It was written during World War II and published in 1945, although it was not widely successful until the late 1950s.
''Animal Farm'' is a thinly veiled critique and satire of Soviet totalitarianism. Many events in the book are based on events from the Soviet Union during the Stalin era. Orwell, though a leftist he was for many years a member of the Independent Labour Party was a critic of Stalin, and suspicious of Moscow directed communism after his experiences in the Spanish Civil War.
Plot
When the farm's prize winning pig, Old Major, calls a meeting of all the animals of Manor Farm, he tells them that he has had a dream in which mankind is gone, and animals are free to live in peace and harmony. He compares the humans to parasites, and then proceeds to teach the animals a revolutionary song, "Beasts of England". The other animals begin to hope and dream for the revolution of such a day. When Old Major dies, a mere three days later, three pigs Snowball (who teaches the animals to read), Napoleon, and Squealer assume command, and turn his dream into a full fledged philosophy. One night, the starved animals suddenly revolt and drive the farmer Mr. Jones, his wife, and his pet raven off the farm and take control. The farm is renamed "Animal Farm" as the animals work towards a future utopia. The Seven Commandments of the new philosophy of Animalism are written on the wall of a barn for all to read, the seventh and most important of which is that "all animals are equal". All animals work, but the workhorse Boxer does more than his fair share and adopts a maxim of his own "I will work harder."
Animal Farm is off to a great start. Snowball teaches the other animals to read and write (though few animals besides the pigs learn to read well), food is plentiful due to a good harvest, and the entire Farm is organized and running smoothly. Even when Mr. Jones tries his last ditch effort to retake control of the farm, the animals easily defeat him at what they later call the "Battle of the Cowshed". Soon, however, things begin to unravel as Napoleon and Snowball begin an epic power struggle over the farm. When Snowball announces his idea for a windmill, Napoleon quickly opposes it. A meeting is held, and when Snowball makes his passionate and articulate speech in favour of the windmill, Napoleon only makes a brief retort and then makes a strange noise to call in nine attack dogs. They burst in and chase Snowball off of the farm. In his absence, Napoleon declares himself the leader of the farm and makes instant changes. He announces that meetings will no longer be held as before, and a committee of pigs alone will decide what happens with the farm.
Napoleon changes his mind about the windmill, claiming (through Squealer) that Snowball stole the idea from him, and the animals begin to work. After a violent storm, the animals wake to find the fruit of their months of labour utterly annihilated. Though neighbouring farmers scoff at the thin walls, Napoleon and Squealer convince everyone that Snowball destroyed it. Napoleon begins to purge the farm, killing many animals he accuses of consorting with Snowball. In the meantime, Boxer takes a second mantra, "Napoleon is always right."
Napoleon begins to abuse his powers even more and life on the farm becomes harder and harder for the rest of the animals. The pigs impose more and more controls on them while reserving privileges for themselves. History is rewritten to villainise Snowball and glorify Napoleon even further. Each step of this development is justified by the pig, Squealer, who on several occasions alters the Seven Commandments on the barn in the dead of night. The song "Beasts of England" is banned as inappropriate now that the dream of Animal Farm has been realised, and is replaced by an anthem glorifying Napoleon who begins to live more and more like a human. The animals, though cold, starving, and overworked, remain convinced that they are still better off than when they were ruled by a man named Jones.
Mr. Frederick, one of the two neighbouring farmers, swindles Napoleon by paying with forged banknotes, and then attacks the farm and uses dynamite to blow up the recently restored windmill. Though the animals of Animal Farm eventually win the battle, they do so at a great cost, as many of the animals, including Boxer, are wounded. However, Boxer continues to work harder and harder, until he finally collapses while working on the windmill. Napoleon sends for a van to come and take Boxer to the veterinarian, but as Boxer is loaded up and the van drives away, the animals read what is written on the side of the van: "Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler." Squealer quickly reports that the van with the old writing has been purchased by the hospital, and later that Boxer has died in the hospital, in spite of the best medical care.
Many years pass, and the pigs learn to walk upright, carry whips, and wear clothes. The Seven Commandments are reduced to a single phrase: "All animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others." Napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs, and the humans of the area (in the adjacent Foxwood Farm run by Mr. Pilkington). He announces his alliance with the humans against the labouring classes of both "worlds".
The animals discover this when they overhear Napoleon's conversations and finally realize that a change has come over the ruling pigs. During a poker match, an argument breaks out between Napoleon and Mr. Pilkington when they both play an Ace of Spades, and the animals realise how they cannot tell the difference between the pigs and the humans.
The pigs walked on two feet and they adopted many of Mr. Jones' customs and principles. The pigs have violated every one of the rules set out in the beginning which they set up. This is when we come to the theme of this book: power corrupts.
Plot references to real events
The ousting of the Humans after the farmers forget to feed the animals Russian Revolution of 1917 led to the removal of the Tsars after a series of famine and poverty.
The refusal of the Humans to refer to Animal Farm by its new name (still calling it Manor Farm) may be indicative of the diplomatic limbo in which the Soviets existed following their early history.
Mr. Jones' last ditch effort to re take the farm (The Battle of the Cowshed) Russian Civil War in which the western capitalist governments sent soldiers to try to remove the Bolsheviks from power.
Napoleon's removal of Snowball Stalin s removal of Leon Trotsky from power in 1927 and his subsequent expulsion.
Napoleon stealing Snowball s idea for a windmill Stalin later shifted away from "World Socialism" to "Socialism in one country" which Trotsky had originally promoted. The windmill can also be considered a symbol of the Soviet Five Year Plans, a concept developed by Trotsky and adopted by Stalin, who claimed them to be his idea.
Moses the raven leaving the farm for a while and then returning Similar to the Russian Orthodox Church going underground and then being brought back to give the workers hope.
Boxer's motto, "Napoleon is always right" is strikingly similar to "Mussolini is always right" a chant used to hail Benito Mussolini during his rule of Italy from 1922 to 1943.
During the rise of Napoleon, he ordered the collection of all the hens' eggs. In an act of defiance, the Hens destroyed their eggs rather than give them to Napoleon During Stalin's collectivization period in the early 1930s, many Ukrainian peasants burned their crops and farms rather than handing them over to the government.
Napoleon's mass executions, of which many were unfair for the alleged crimes Stalin executed his political enemies for various crimes after they were tortured and forced to falsely confess.
The four pigs that go against Napoleon's will represent the White movement.
Napoleon's replacement of the farm anthem "Beasts of England" with an inane composition by the pig poet Minimus ("Animal Farm, Animal Farm Never through me Will you come to harm") In 1943, Stalin replaced the old national anthem "the Internationale" with "the Hymn of the Soviet Union." The old internationale glorified the revolution and "the people." The original version of the Hymn of the Soviet Union glorified Stalin so heavily that after his death in 1953, entire sections of the anthem had to be replaced or removed. Orwell could have also been referring to Napoleon Bonaparte's banning of the French national hymn, La Marseillaise in 1799.
Napoleon's dealing with Mr. Frederick, who eventually betrays Animal Farm and destroys the windmill. Though Animal Farm repels the human attack, many animals are wounded and killed Stalin s Molotov Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany in 1939, which was later betrayed in 1941 when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union. Though the Soviet Union won the war, it came at a tremendous price of roughly 8.5 15 million Soviet soldiers (unconfirmed) and many civilians, coming to an incredible estimated 20 million dead, as well as the utter destruction of the Western Soviet Union and its prized collective farms which Stalin had created in the 1930s.
Napoleon's later alliance with the humans Stalin s non aggression pact with Hitler in the early years of WWII.
Napoleon's changing Animal Farm back to Manor The Red Army s name was changed from the "Workers' and Peasants' Red Army" to the "Soviet Army" to appear as a more appealing and professional organization rather than an army of the common people.
After Old Major dies, his skull is placed on display on a tree stump. Similarly, Lenin's (whom Old Major is based on along with Karl Marx) embalmed body was put on display in Lenin's Tomb in Red Square postmortem, where it still remains.
Squealer, constantly changing the commandments, is said to be a reference to a perversion in Russian religious history, as observed by Leo Tolstoy when the essential precepts of the Sermon on the Mount were altered by Russian Orthodox Church. It may also refer to the revision of history texts to glorify Stalin during his regime.
Characters
The events and characters in Animal Farm are all carefully drawn to represent the history of the Soviet Union Orwell makes this explicit in the case of Napoleon, whom he directly connects to Stalin in a letter of 17 March 1945 to the publisher.
:..when the windmill is blown up, I wrote 'all the animals including Napoleon flung themselves on their faces'. I would like to alter it to 'all the animals except Napoleon'. If that has been printed it's not worth bothering about, but I just thought the alteration would be fair to JS Joseph Stalin , as he did stay in Moscow during the German advance.
The other characters have their analogies in the real world, but care should be taken with these comparisons as they do not always match history exactly and often simply represent generalised concepts.
The pigs
Napoleon The pig who becomes the leader of Animal Farm post Rebellion. Created based on the actions of Joseph Stalin, he uses his military (of nine attack dogs) to cement his power through fear. Napoleon craftily drives out his opponent, Snowball.
Snowball The pig who fights Napoleon for control post Rebellion. Inspired by Leon Trotsky, Snowball is a passionate intellectual and is far more honest about his motives than Napoleon. Snowball easily wins the loyalty of most of the animals. Trotsky was driven into exile in Mexico where he was assassinated.
Squealer The pig who serves as public speaker. Inspired by Vyacheslav Molotov and the Russian paper Pravda, Squealer twists and abuses the language to excuse, justify and extol Napoleon's actions, no matter how egregious. All his life, George Orwell made it a point to show how politicians used language. Squealer limits the debate by complicating it, and he confuses and disorients, making claims that the pigs need the extra luxury they are taking in order to function properly. To squeal is to betray, something Squealer does often to his fellow animals.
Minimus A poet pig who writes a song about Napoleon, representing admirers of Stalin both inside and outside the USSR such as Maxim Gorky.
Old Major As a fellow socialist, Orwell agreed with some of Karl Marx's politics, and even respected Vladimir Lenin. In fact, the satire in Animal Farm is not of Marxism, or Lenin's revolution, but of the corruption that occurred later. Major, who is based upon both Lenin and Marx, is the inspiration which fuels the rest of the book. Though it is a positive image, Orwell does slip some flaws in Old Major, such as how during his complaints about the abuse of animals he admits that he has been largely free from those terrors.
Pinkeye A small piglet who tastes Napoleon's food for poisoning.
Piglets While not truly noted in the novel, these piglets are hinted to be the children of Napoleon, and are the first generation of animals to actually be subjugated to his idea of animal inequality.
The humans
Mr. Jones The original owner of Manor Farm. He is probably based on Tsar Nicholas II.
Mr. Frederick The tough owner of Pinchfield, a well kept neighbouring farm. He is probably based on Germany and or Adolf Hitler.
Mr. Pilkington The easy going but crafty owner of Foxwood, a neighbouring farm. He represents Britain and or Winston Churchill.
Mr. Whymper A human whom Napoleon hires to represent Animal Farm in human society. He is loosely based on George Bernard Shaw who visited the USSR in 1931 and praised what he found.
The other animals
Boxer Possibly one of the more popular characters, Boxer is the tragic avatar of the working class, or proletariat: loyal, dedicated, and strong. His major flaw, however, is his blind trust of the leaders and his inability to see corruption. He is used and abused by the pigs as much or more than he was by Jones. His death serves to show just how far the pigs are willing to go. A strong and loyal draft horse, Boxer played a huge part in keeping the Farm together prior to his death. Boxer could also represent a Stakhanovite. His name is a reference to the Boxer Rebellion
Clover Boxer's close friend, and also a draft horse. She blames herself for forgetting the original Seven Commandments when Squealer revises them. She represents the middle class educated people who acquiesce to the subversion of principles by the powerful.
Mollie A horse who likes wearing ribbons (which represent luxury) and being pampered by humans. She represents upper class people, the Bourgeoisie who fled from the U.S.S.R after the Russian Revolution.
Benjamin A donkey who is cynical about the revolution. He is said to be inspired by Orwell himself. He represented the skeptical people in and out of Russia who believed that communism would not help the people of Russia
Moses A tame raven who spreads stories of Sugarcandy Mountain, the "animal heaven". These beliefs are denounced by the pigs. Moses represents religion (specifically the Russian Orthodox Church), which has always been in conflict with communism. It is interesting to note that, while Moses initially leaves the farm after the rebellion, he later returns and is supported by the pigs. This represents the cynical use of religion by the state to anaesthetise the minds of the masses.
Muriel A goat who reads the edited commandments. She may represent intelligent labour.
Jessie and Bluebell Two dogs who give birth in Chapter III. Their puppies are nurtured by Napoleon to inspire fear, without doubt representing the formation of the NKVD KGB.
The Hens Represent the Kulaks, landed peasants persecuted by Stalin.
The Dogs Napoleon's secret police and bodyguards (inspired by Cheka, NKVD, OGPU, MVD)
The Sheep The sheep show the dumb, animal following of the proletariats in the midst of the Russian Civil War ( Four legs good, two legs bad! ).
Significance
The book is an allegory about the events following the revolution in the Soviet Union, and in particular the rise of Stalinism and the betrayal of the revolution which basically replaced one dictatorship for another.
Orwell wrote the book following his experiences during the Spanish Civil War which are described in another of his books, ''Homage to Catalonia''. He intended it to be a strong condemnation of what he saw as the Stalinist corruption of the original socialist ideals, in which he believed and continued to believe after he saw a revolution betrayed, as in Spain. For the preface of a Ukrainian edition he prepared in 1947, Orwell describes what gave him the idea of setting the book on a farmref ref.
:..I saw a little boy, perhaps ten years old, driving a huge cart horse along a narrow path, whipping it whenever it tried to turn. It struck me that if only such animals became aware of their strength we should have no power over them, and that men exploit animals in much the same way as the rich exploit the proletariat.
This Ukrainian edition was an early propaganda use of the book. It was printed to be distributed among the soviet citizens of Ukraine who were just some of the many millions of displaced persons throughout Europe at the end of the Second World War. The American occupation forces did not appreciate these illegal presses, printing propaganda, and confiscated 1,500 copies of ''Animal Farm'', handing them to the Soviet authorities. The politics in the book also affected Britain, with Orwell reporting that Ernest Bevin was "terrified"ref Letter to Herbert Read, 18 August, 1945. ref that it may cause embarrassment if published before the 1945 general election.
In recent years the book has been used to compare new movements that overthrow heads of a corrupt and undemocratic government or organization, only to become corrupt and oppressive themselves over time as they succumb to the trappings of power and begin using violent and dictatorial methods to keep it. Such analogies have been used for many former African colonies such as Zimbabwe and Democratic Republic of Congo, whose succeeding African born rulers were thought to be as corrupt as the European colonists they supplanted.
In schools Animal Farm is used in the Core Knowledge curriculum. Core knowledge is based on the interaction of different subjects in schools. The way Animal Farm comes into play is that if a student's Geography or History Class is learning about the former Soviet Union, the English class will be reading Animal Farm.
Post publication views of the book
In the post War years it became apparent to Orwell that anti Russian literature was not something which most major publishing houses would touch including his regular publisher Gollancz. One publisher he sought to sell his book to rejected it on the grounds of government advice although it was later found that the civil servant who gave the order was a Soviet spy.ref''Orwell: The Life'', D.J. Taylor, 2003, ISBN 0 8050 7473 2)'' ref
Orwell originally prepared a preface on freedom of the press for the book which noted "The sinister fact about literary censorship in England is that it is largely voluntary. ... Things are kept right out of the British press, not because the Government intervened but because of a general tacit agreement that it wouldn t do to mention that particular fact."ref ref Somewhat ironically, the preface itself was censored and is not published with most copies of the book.
Film versions
The book was the basis of an animated feature film in 1955 (Britain's first full length animated movie), directed by John Halas and Joy Batchelor and quietly commissioned by the American CIA, which softened the theme of the story slightly by reducing the role of Moses, the character representing religion, and adding an epilogue, that occurs immediately after the novel's iconic concluding imagery is depicted, where the other animals successfully revolt against the pigs.
There was also a 1999 live action film directed by John Stephenson, with voices by Kelsey Grammer as Snowball, Patrick Stewart as Napoleon, and Ian Holm as Squealer. Despite a few differences (such as completely different songs and Jesse being the first to question the pigs), much of the plot is loyal to the book. The film diverges from the book with an additional epilogue in which Jesse and several animals escape and return years later to a post Napoleon era Animal Farm.
Cultural references
Pink Floyd's 1977 album ''Animals'' was partially inspired by Animal Farm. It categorises people as pigs, dogs, or sheep.
In an episode of ''Johnny Bravo'' ("Aunt Katie's Farm"), Johnny, while dressed in a pig costume, goes crazy and yells, "Four legs good! Two legs bad!" over and over.
Radical socialist rappers Dead Prez released a song called "Animal in Man" off their debut LP, ''Let's Get Free'', re telling the story.
A song off canadian band Protest the Hero's debut CD A Calculated Use of Sound, called "Red Stars Over the Battle of the Cowshed" is presumably a reference to Animal Farm
See also
'''Songs'''
"Beasts of England"
"Comrade Napoleon"
'''Battles'''
Battle of the Cowshed
Battle of the Windmill
'''Characters'''
Old Major
Napoleon
Snowball
Squealer
Frederick
Pilkington
Jones
Boxer
'''The Seven Commandments'''
Seven Commandments
References
references
External links
Analytical essays of the novel
Searchable, indexed etext.
Includes publication data and search feature.
ISBN numbers
ISBN 9966472487 (paperback, 1988, Swahili translation)
ISBN 0582021731 (paper text, 1989)
ISBN 0151072558 (hardcover, 1990)
ISBN 0582060109 (paper text, 1991)
ISBN 0679420398 (hardcover, 1993)
ISBN 0606001026 (prebound, 1996)
ISBN 0151002177 (hardcover, 1996, Anniversary Edition)
ISBN 0452277507 (paperback, 1996, Anniversary Edition)
ISBN 0451526341 (mass market paperback, 1996, Anniversary Edition)
ISBN 0582530083 (1996)
ISBN 1560005203 (cloth text, 1998, Large Type Edition)
ISBN 0791047741 (hardcover, 1999)
ISBN 0451525361 (paperback, 1999)
ISBN 0764108190 (paperback, 1999)
ISBN 082207009X (e book, 1999)
ISBN 0758778430 (hardcover, 2002)
ISBN 0151010269 (hardcover, 2003, with ''Nineteen Eighty Four'')
ISBN 0452284244 (paperback, 2003, Centennial Edition)
ISBN 0848801202 (hardcover)
Category:1945 books
Category:Animal Farm
Category:Dystopian novels
Category:English novels
Category:George Orwell books
Category:Modern Library 100 best novels
Category:Satirical books
Category:Time Magazine 100 best novels
Category:Twentieth century British novels
da:Kammerat Napoleon
de:Farm der Tiere
es:Rebeli n en la granja
fr:La Ferme des animaux
ko:
it:La fattoria degli animali
he:
hu: llatfarm
nl:Animal Farm
ja:
lv:Dz vnieku ferma
no:Kamerat Napoleon
pl:Folwark zwierz cy
pt:Animal Farm
fi:El inten vallankumous
sv:Djurfarmen
zh:
taxobox
color pink
name Amphibians
image Caerulea3 crop.jpg
image width 230px
image caption White's Tree Frog (''Litoria caerulea'')
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
subphylum Vertebrata
classis '''Amphibia'''
classis authority Linnaeus 1758
subdivision ranks Orders
subdivision
Subclass Labyrinthodontia ''extinct''br
Subclass Lepospondyli ''extinct''br
Subclass Lissamphibiabr
Anurabr
Caudatabr
Gymnophiona
'''Amphibians''' (class '''Amphibia''') are a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four legged vertebrates) that do not have amniotic eggs. Amphibians (from Greek '' '' "both" and '' '' "life") generally spend part of their time on land, but they do not have the adaptations to an entirely terrestrial existence found in most other modern tetrapods (amniotes). There are about 5,950 described, living species of amphibians. The study of amphibians and reptiles is known as herpetology.
History of amphibians
(''Salamandra salamandra'') Amphibians developed with the characteristics of pharyngeal slits gills, a dorsal nerve cord, a notochord, and a post anal tail at different stages of their life. They have persisted since the dawn of tetrapods 390 million years ago in the Devonian period, when they were the first four legged animals to develop lungs. During the following Carboniferous period they also developed the ability to walk on land to avoid aquatic competition and predation while allowing them to travel from water source to water source. As a group they maintained the status of the dominant animal for nearly 75 million years. Throughout their history they have ranged in size from the 3 foot (90cm) long Devonian Ichthyostega, to the slightly larger 5 foot (150cm) long Permian Eryops, and down to the tiny ''Brachycephalus didactylus'' (Brazilian Gold Frog) and ''Eleutherodactylus iberia'' from Cuba, with a total length of 9.6 9.8 millimeters (0.4 inches). Amphibians have mastered almost every climate on earth from the hottest deserts to the frozen arctic.
Classification
from the San Antonio zoo
Traditionally the amphibians are taken to include all tetrapods that are not amniotes. Recent amphibians all belong to a single subgroup of these, called the Lissamphibia. Recently there has been a tendency to restrict the class Amphibia to the Lissamphibia, i.e. to exclude tetrapods that are not more closely related to modern forms than they are to modern reptiles, birds, and mammals.
There are two ancient, extinct, subclasses:
Subclass Labyrinthodontia (paraphyletic)
Subclass Lepospondyli
Of the remaining modern subclass '''Lissamphibia''' there are three orders:
Order Anura (frogs and toads) (in Superorder Salientia): 5,228 species
Order Caudata or Urodela (salamanders): 552 species
Order Gymnophiona or Apoda (caecilians): 171 species
Authorities disagree on whether Salientia is a Superorder that includes the order Anura, or whether Anura is a sub order of the order Salientia. In effect Salientia includes all the Anura plus a single Triassic proto frog species, ''Triadobatrachus massinoti''. Practical considerations seem to favour using the former arrangement now.
Reproduction
For the purpose of reproduction most amphibians are bound to fresh water. A few tolerate brackish water, but there are no true sea water amphibians. Several hundred frog species in adaptive radiations (e.g., Eleutherodactylus, the Pacific Platymantines, the Australo Papuan microhylids, and many other tropical frogs), however, do not need any water whatsoever. They reproduce via direct development, an ecological and evolutionary adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free standing water. Almost all of these frogs live in wet tropical rainforests and their eggs hatch directly into miniature versions of the adult, bypassing the tadpole stage entirely. Several species have also adapted to arid and semi arid environments, but most of them still need water to lay their eggs. Symbiosis with single celled algae that lives in the jelly like layer of the eggs has evolved several times. The larvae (tadpoles or polliwogs) breathe with exterior gills. After hatching, they start to transform gradually into the adult's appearance. This process is called metamorphosis. Typically, the animals then leave the water and become terrestrial adults, but there are many interesting exceptions to this general way of reproduction.
The most obvious part of the amphibian metamorphosis is the formation of four legs in order to support the body on land. But there are several other changes:
The gills are replaced by other respiratory organs, i.e. lungs.
The skin changes and develops glands to avoid dehydration
The eyes get eyelids and adapt to vision outside the water
An eardrum is developed to lock the middle ear
In frogs and toads, the tail disappears
Amphibian conservation
of Monteverde, Costa Rica was among the first casualties of amphibian declines. Formerly abundant, it was last seen in 1989.
Dramatic declines in amphibian populations, including population crashes and mass localized extinction, have been noted in the past two decades from locations all over the world, and amphibian declines are thus perceived as one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity. A number of causes are believed to be involved, including habitat destruction and modification, over exploitation, pollution, introduced species, climate change, and disease. However, many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly understood, and amphibian declines are currently a topic of much ongoing research.
See also
Frog zoology
Prehistoric amphibian
Tetrapod
References
Duellman Trueb, ''Biology of Amphibians''
cite journal
last Pounds
first J. Alan
title Widespread amphibian extinctions from epidemic disease driven by global warming
url http: www.nature.com nature journal v439 n7073 full nature04246.html
journal Nature
volume 439
pages 161 167
year 2006
month January
id
coauthors Mart n R. Bustamante, Luis A. Coloma, Jamie A. Consuegra, Michael P. L. Fogden, Pru N. Foster, Enrique La Marca, Karen L. Masters, Andr s Merino Viteri, Robert Puschendorf, Santiago R. Ron, G. Arturo S nchez Azofeifa, Christopher J. Still and Bruce E. Young
Solomon Berg Martin, ''Biology''
cite journal
last Stuart
first Simon N.
coauthors Janice S. Chanson, Neil A. Cox, Bruce E. Young, Ana S. L. Rodrigues, Debra L. Fischman, Robert W. Waller
title Status and trends of amphibian declines and extinctions worldwide
url http: www.sciencemag.org cgi content full 306 5702 1783
journal Science
volume 306
issue 5702
pages 1783 1786
year 2004
month December
id
External links
Category:Chordates
Category:Amphibians
bg:
ca:Amfibi
cs:Oboj iveln ci
cy:Amffibiad
da:Padde
de:Amphibien
es:Amphibia
eo:Amfibioj
fr:Amphibia
ko:
id:Amfibia
io:Amfibia
it:Amphibia
he:
lt:Varliagyviai
li:Amfibie
mk:
ms:Amfibia
nl:Amfibie n
nds:Amphibia
ja:
no:Amfibier
oc:Amphibia
pl:P azy
pt:Amphibia
ru:
simple:Amphibian
sl:Dvo ivke
fi:Sammakkoel imet
sr:
sv:Groddjur
tr: ki ya aml lar
uk:
zh:
US state
Name Alaska
Fullname State of Alaska
Flag Flag of Alaska.svg
Flaglink Flag of Alaska
Seal Alaskastateseal.jpg
Map ak locator.png
Nickname The Last Frontier, The Land of the Midnight Sun
Motto North to the Future
Capital Juneau
OfficialLang English
Languages English 85.7 , Native North American 5.2 , Spanish 2.9
LargestCity Anchorage
Governor Frank Murkowski (R)
Senators Ted Stevens (R)brLisa Murkowski (R)
PostalAbbreviation AK
AreaRank 1supst sup
TotalArea 663,267 mi 1717854
LandArea 571,951 mi 1481347
WaterArea 91,316 mi 236507
PCWater 13.77
PopRank 47supth sup
2000Pop 626,932
DensityRank 50supth sup
2000Density 1.09 mi 0.42
AdmittanceOrder 49supth sup
AdmittanceDate January 3, 1959
TimeZone Alaska: UTC 9 8br Aleutian: UTC 10 9 (west of 169 30')
Latitude 54 40'N to 71 50'N
Longitude 130 W to 173 E
Width 808 mi 1300
Length 1,479 mi 2380
HighestElev 20,321 ft 6194
MeanElev 10,039 ft 3060
LowestElev 0 ft 0
ISOCode US AK
Website www.state.ak.us
'''Alaska''' (IPA: ) is the 49th state of the United States. It was admitted on January 3, 1959. The population of the state is 626,932, as of 2000, according to the 2000 U.S. census. Alaska is most likely ranked the fourth smallest state population wise in the U.S. with Wyoming, Vermont, and by now North Dakota smaller than Alaska. The name "Alaska" is most likely derived from the Aleut word ''Alyeska'', meaning ''greater land'' as opposed to the Aleut word ''Aleutia,'' meaning ''lesser land''. To the Aleuts, this distinction was a linguistic variation distinguishing the ''mainland'' from an ''island''.
It is bordered by Yukon Territory and British Columbia, Canada to the east, the Gulf of Alaska and the Pacific Ocean to the south, the Bering Sea, Bering Strait, and Chukchi Sea to the west, and the Beaufort Sea and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska is the largest state by area in the United States. It is larger in area than all but 18 of the world's nations.
History
Alaska was first inhabited by humans who came across the Bering Land Bridge. Eventually, Alaska became populated by the Inupiaq, Inuit and Yupik Eskimos, Aleuts, and a variety of American Indian groups. Most, if not all, of the pre Columbian population of the Americas probably took this route and continued further south and east.
The first written accounts indicate that the first Europeans to reach Alaska came from Russia. Vitus Bering sailed east and saw Mt. St. Elias. The Russian American Company hunted sea otters for their fur. The colony was never very profitable, because of the costs of transportation.
At the urging of U.S. Secretary of State William Seward, the United States Senate approved the purchase of Alaska from Russia for 7,200,000 (approximately 134,000,000 in 2005 dollars, adjusted for inflation) on 9 April 1867, and the United States flag was raised on 18 October of that same year (now called Alaska Day). Coincident with the ownership change, the de facto International Date Line was moved westward, and Alaska changed from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian calendar. Therefore, for residents, Friday, October 6, 1867 was followed by Friday, October 18, 1867 two Fridays in a row because of the date line shift.
The first American administrator of Alaska was Polish immigrant W odzimierz Krzy anowski. The purchase was not popular in the contiguous United States, where Alaska became known as "Seward's Folly" or "Seward's Icebox." Alaska celebrates the purchase each year on the last Monday of March, calling it Seward's Day. After the purchase of Alaska between 1867 and 1884 the name was changed to the Department of Alaska. Between 1884 and 1912 it was called the district of Alaska.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the Alaska Statehood Act into United States law on 7 July 1958 which paved the way for Alaska's admission into the Union on January 3 1959.
Alaska suffered one of the worst earthquakes in recorded North American history on Good Friday 1964 (see Good Friday Earthquake).
In 1976, the people of Alaska amended the state's constitution, establishing the Alaska Permanent Fund. The fund invests a portion of the state's mineral revenue, including revenue from the Trans Alaskan Pipeline System, "to benefit all generations of Alaskans." In March 2005, the fund's value was over 30 billion.
Prior to 1983, the state lay across four different time zonesPacific Standard Time (UTC 8 hours) in the southeast panhandle, a small area of Yukon Standard Time (UTC 9 hours) around Yakutat, AlaskaHawaii Standard Time (UTC 10 hours) in the Anchorage and Fairbanks vicinity, with the Nome area and most of the Aleutian Islands observing Bering Standard Time (UTC 11 hours). In 1983 the number of time zones was reduced to two, with the entire mainland plus the inner Aleutian Islands going to UTC 9 hours (and this zone then being renamed Alaska Standard Time as the Yukon Territory had several years earlier (circa 1975) adopted a single time zone identical to Pacific Standard Time), and the remaining Aleutian Islands were slotted into the UTC 10 hours zone, which was then renamed HawaiiAleutian Standard Time.
Over the years various vessels have been named USS ''Alaska'', in honor of the state.
During World War II three of the outer Aleutian IslandsAttu, Agattu and Kiskawere occupied by Japanese troops. It was the only territory within the current borders of the United States to have land occupied during the war.
Politics
Alaska is often characterized as a Republican leaning state with strong Libertarian tendencies. Local political communities often work on issues related to land use development, fishing, tourism, and individual rights as many residents are proud of their rough Alaskan heritage.
Alaska Natives, while organized in and around their communities, are often active within the Native corporations which have been given ownership over large tracts of land, and thus need to deliberate resource conservation and development issues.
In presidential elections, the state's Electoral College votes have been most often won by a Republican nominee. Only once has Alaska supported a Democratic nominee, when it supported Lyndon B. Johnson in the landslide year of 1964, although the 1960 and 1968 elections were close. No state has voted for a Democratic presidential candidate fewer times. President George W. Bush won the state's electoral votes in 2004 by a margin of 25 percentage points with 61.1 of the vote. Juneau stands out as an area that supports Democratic candidates.
When the United States Congress, in 1957 and 1958, debated the wisdom of admitting it as the 49th state, much of the political debate centered on whether Alaska would become a Democratic or Republican leaning state. Conventional wisdom had it that, with its rugged individualism, penchant for new ideas, and dependence on the Federal Government largess for basic needs, it would become a Democratic stronghold, about which Republicans, and the, then, Republican Administration of Dwight Eisenhower had reservations. Given time, those fears proved roundly unfounded. After an early flirtatious period with liberal politics, the political climate of Alaska changed quickly once petroleum was discovered and the federal government came to be seen as 'meddling' in local affairs. Still, despite its libertarian leanings, the state regularly takes in more federal money than it gives out, a fact that can be attributed at least partially to its equal representation in the United States Senate.
In recent years, the Alaska Legislature is a 20 member Senate serving 4 year terms and 40 member House serving 2 year terms. It has been dominated by conservatives, generally Republicans. Likewise, recent state governors have been mostly conservatives, although not always elected under the official 'Party' banner. Republican Wally Hickel was elected to the office for a second term in 1990 after jumping the Republican ship and briefly joining the Alaskan Independence Party ticket just long enough to be reelected. He subsequently officially 'rejoined' the Republican fold in 1994.
Alaska's members of the U.S. Congress are all Republican. U.S. Senator Ted Stevens was appointed to the position following the death of U.S. Senator Bob Bartlett in December of 1968, and has never lost a re election campaign since. As the longest serving Republican in the Senate (some political wits call him Senator For Life), Stevens has been a crucial force in gaining Federal money for his state.
Until his resignation from the U.S. Senate to run for Governor, Republican Frank Murkowski held the state's other Senatorial position and, as Governor, was allowed to appoint his daughter, Lisa Murkowski as his successor. She won a full six year term on her own in 2004.
Alaska's sole U.S. House Representative, Don Young won re election to his 17th straight term, also in 2004. His seniority in House ranks him as one of the most influential Republican House members. His position on the House Transportation Committee allowed him to parlay some 450 million to two bridge projects in Alaska, named the ''Bridges to Nowhere'', for which he gained national notoriety following the devastation in the State of Louisiana following Hurricane Katrina and his insistence that the money not be returned to aid in rebuilding the Gulf Coast.
Geography
thumb 250px Near Little Port Walter
Alaska is one of the two states that is not bordered by another US state, Hawaii being the other. It is the only state that is both in North America and is not part of the 48 contiguous states about 500 miles (800 kilometers) of Canadian territory separate Alaska from Washington. Therefore, Alaska is an exclave of the United States that is part of the continental U.S. but is not part of the contiguous U.S. It is also the only mainland state whose capital city is accessible only via ship or air. There are no roads connecting Juneau to the rest of the state.
Alaska is the largest state in the United States in terms of land area, 570,374 square miles (1477261 km ). If a map of Alaska were superimposed upon a map of the Continental United States, Alaska would overlap Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, New Mexico and Colorado. Alaska has the longest coastline of any state.
One scheme for describing the state's geography is by labeling the regions:
South Central Alaska is the southern coastal region and is the population center for the state. The Municipality of Anchorage and many small but growing towns, such as Palmer, and Wasilla, lie within this area. Petroleum industrial plants, transportation, tourism, and two military bases form the core of the economy here.
The Alaska Panhandle, also known as Southeast Alaska, is home to Juneau, many small towns, tidewater glaciers and extensive forests. Tourism, fishing, forestry and state government anchor the economy.
The Alaska Interior is home to Fairbanks. The geography is marked by large braided rivers, such as the Yukon River and the Kuskokwim River, as well as Arctic tundra lands and shorelines.
The Alaskan Bush is the remote, less crowded part of the state, encompassing 380 native villages and small towns such as Nome, Bethel, Kotzebue and, most famously, Barrow, the northernmost town in the United States.
The northeast corner of Alaska is covered by the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which covers 19,049,236 acres (79,318 km ).
With its numerous islands, Alaska has nearly 34,000 miles (54700 km) of tidal shoreline. The island chain extending west from the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula is called the Aleutian Islands. Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians. For example, Unimak Island is home to Mount Shishaldin, a moderately active volcano that rises to 9,980 ft (3042m) above sea level. The chain of volcanoes extends to Mount Spurr, west of Anchorage on the mainland.
North America's second largest tides occur in Turnagain Arm just south of Anchorage, which often sees tidal differences of more than 35 feet (10.7m).
Alaska is home to 3.5 million lakes of 20 acres (8ha) or larger. Marshlands and wetland permafrost cover 188,320 square miles (487747km , mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands. Frozen water, in the form of glacier ice, covers some 16,000 square miles (41440km ) of land and 1200 square miles (3108km ) of tidal zone. The Bering Glacier complex near the southeastern border with Yukon, Canada, covers 2250 square miles (5827km ) alone.
The Aleutian Islands actually cross longitude 180 , also making it the easternmost state, although the International Date Line doglegs around them to keep the whole state in the same day. It is part of the extreme points of the United States.
According to the October 1998 report of the United States Bureau of Land Management, approximately 65 of Alaska is owned and managed by the U.S. Federal Government as national forests, national parks, and national wildlife refuges. Of these, the Bureau of Land Management manages 87 million acres (350000km ), or 23.8 of the state. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Of the remaining land area, the State of Alaska owns 24.5 another 10 is managed by thirteen regional and dozens of local Native corporations created under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act. Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling less than 1 .
''See also:''
List of Alaska rivers
Alaska Peninsula
Bristol Bay
Boroughs and census areas
Alaska has no counties in the sense used in the rest of the country. Instead, the state is divided into 27 census areas and boroughs. The difference between boroughs and census areas is that boroughs have an organized area wide government, while census areas are artificial divisions defined by the United States Census Bureau for statistical purposes only. Areas of the state not in organized boroughs compose what the government of Alaska calls the unorganized borough. Borough level government services in the unorganized borough are provided by the state itself.
Economy
The state's 2003 total gross state product was 31 billion. Its ''per capita'' income for 2003 was 33,213, 14supth sup in the nation. Alaska's main export is seafood. Agriculture represents only a fraction of the Alaska economy. Agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock. Manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere. Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation. Military bases are a significant component of the economy in both Fairbanks and Anchorage. Its industrial outputs are crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, gold, precious metals, zinc and other mining, seafood processing, timber and wood products. There is also a growing service and tourism sector. Tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.
The cost of goods in Alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states. This has changed for the most part in Anchorage and Fairbanks, where the cost of living is actually less than some major cities in the Lower 48, thanks to lower housing and transportation costs. The introduction of big box stores in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau also did much to lower prices. However, rural Alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods, compared to the rest of the country due to the relatively limited transportation infrastructure. Many rural residents come in to these cities and purchase food and goods in bulk from warehouse clubs like Costco and Sam's Club. Some have embraced the free shipping offers of some online retailers to purchase items much more cheaply than they could in their own communities, if they are available at all.
Transportation
thumb 234px Bridge on Alaska Highway between Watson Lake and Whitehorse.
Alaska is arguably the least connected state in terms of road transportation. The state's road system covers a relatively small area of the state, linking the central population centers and the Alaska Highway, the principal route out of the state through Canada. The state capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, which has spurred several debates over the decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system. One unique feature of the road system is the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel, which links the Seward Highway south of Anchorage with the relatively isolated community of Whittier. The tunnel held the title of the longest road tunnel in North America (at nearly 2.5 miles 4km ) until completion of the 3.5 mile (5.6km) Interstate 93 tunnel as part of the "Big Dig" project in Boston, Massachusetts. The Anderson Tunnel combines a one lane roadway and train tracks in the same housing. Consequently, eastbound traffic, westbound traffic, and the Alaska Railroad must share the tunnel, resulting in waits of 20 minutes or more to enter. As reflected on the Alaska Department of Transportation , it is now considered "North America's longest railroad highway tunnel."
The Alaska Railroad runs from Seward through Anchorage, Denali, and Fairbanks to North Pole, with spurs to Whittier and Palmer. The railroad is famous for its summertime passenger services but also plays a vital part in moving Alaska's natural resources, such as coal and gravel, to ports in Anchorage, Whittier and Seward. The Alaska Railroad is the only remaining railroad in North America to use cabooses on its freight trains. A stretch of the track along an area inaccessible by road serves as the only transportation to cabins in the area.
Most cities and villages in the state are accessible only by sea or air. Alaska has a well developed ferry system, known as the Alaska Marine Highway, which serves the cities of Southeast and the Alaska Peninsula. The system also operates a ferry service from Bellingham, Washington up the Inside Passage to Skagway. Cities not served by road or sea can only be reached by air, accounting for Alaska's extremely well developed Bush air servicesan Alaskan novelty.
Anchorage itself, and to a lesser extent Fairbanks, are serviced by many major airlines. Air travel is the cheapest and most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state. Anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (unofficial sources have estimated the numbers for 2004 at some four million tourists arriving in Alaska between May and September).
However, regular flights to most villages and towns within the state are commercially challenging to provide. Alaska Airlines is the only major airline offering in state travel with jet service (sometimes in combination cargo and passenger Boeing 737 200s) from Anchorage and Fairbanks to regional hubs like Bethel, Nome, Kotzebue, Dillingham, Kodiak, and other larger communities as well as to major Southeast and Alaska Peninsula communities. The bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional commuter airlines like: Era Aviation, PenAir, and Frontier Flying Service. The smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered Bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the Cessna Caravan, the most popular aircraft in use in the state. Much of this service can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to Alaskan rural communities. The program requires 70 of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities. But perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan plane is the Bush seaplane. The world's busiest seaplane base is Lake Hood, located next to Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry passengers, cargo, and lots of items from stores and warehouse clubs.
Another Alaskan transportation method is the dogsled. In modern times, dog mushing is more of a sport than a true means of transportation. Various races are held around the state, but the best known is the Iditarod, a 1,150 mile (1850km) trail from Anchorage to Nome. The race commemorates the famous 1925 serum run to Nome in which mushers and dogs like Balto took much needed medicine to the diphtheria stricken community of Nome when all other means of transportation had failed. Mushers from all over the world come to Anchorage each March to compete for cash prizes and prestige.
Demographics
class "toccolours" align right cellpadding 4 cellspacing 0 style "margin:0 0 1em 1em font size: 95 "
! colspan 2 bgcolor " ccccff" align center Historical populations
! align center Censusbryear !! align right Population
colspan 2 hr
align center 1950 align right 128,643
align center 1960 align right 226,167
align center 1970 align right 300,382
align center 1980 align right 401,851
align center 1990 align right 550,043
align center 2000 align right 626,932
As of 2005, Alaska has an estimated population of 663,661, which is an increase of 5,906, or 0.9 , from the prior year and an increase of 36,730, or 5.9 , since the year 2000. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 36,590 people derived from its 53,132 births of which 16,542 deaths is subtracted from, and an increase due to net migration of 1,181 people into the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 5,800 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 4,619 people.
Alaska is the least densely populated state.
Race and ancestry
The racial breakdown of the state is:
67.6 White (Non Hispanic)
15.6 Native American or Alaska Native
4.1 Hispanic
4 Asian
3.5 Black
5.4 Mixed race
The largest ancestry groups in the state are: German (16.6 ), Alaska Native or American Indian (15.6 ), Irish (10.8 ), English (9.6 ), American (5.7 ), and Norwegian (4.2 ). Alaska has the largest percentage of American Indians (16 ) of any state.
The vast, sparsely populated bush regions of northern and western Alaska are primarily inhabited by Alaska Natives, and they also have a large presence in the southeast. Anchorage, Fairbanks, and other parts of south central and southeast Alaska have many whites of northern and western European ancestry. The Wrangell Petersburg area has many residents of Scandinavian ancestry and the Aleutians have many Filipinos. Most of the state's black population lives in Anchorage.
As of 2000, 85.7 of Alaska residents age 5 and older speak English at home and 5.2 speak Native American languages. Spanish speakers make up 2.9 of the population, followed by Tagalog speakers at 1.5 and Korean at 0.8 .
Religion
Christian 81
Protestant 68
Baptist 11
Lutheran 8
Methodist 6
Pentecostal 2
Episcopal 1
Quaker 1
Orthodox 8
Catholic 7
Latter day Saint 1
Other religions 1
Not religious agnostic 17
Notable is Alaska's relatively large Eastern Orthodox Christian population, a result of early Russian colonization and missionary work among indigenous Alaskans.
Social issues
Alaska has long had a problem with alcohol use and abuse. Many rural communities in Alaska have outlawed its import. "Dry", "wet", and "damp" are terms describing a community's laws on liquor consumption. This problem directly relates to Alaska's high rate of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) as well as contributing to the high rate of suicides. This is a controversial topic for many residents.
Alaska has also had a problem with "brain drain" as many of its young people, including most of the highest academic achievers, leave the state upon graduating high school. While for many this functions as a sort of walkabout, many do not return to the state. The University of Alaska has been successfully combating this by offering four year scholarships to the top 10 percent of Alaska high school graduates, the Alaska Scholars Program.
Domestic abuse and other violent crimes are also at notoriously high levels in the state this is in part linked to alcohol abuse.
Notable Alaskans
The National Statuary Hall of the United States of America is part of the Capitol in Washington, D.C. Each state has selected one or two distinguished citizens and provided statues. Alaska's are of its first two senators:
Edward Lewis "Bob" Bartlett (19041968) was the territorial delegate to the US Congress from 1944 to 1958, and was elected as the first senior U.S. Senator in 1958 and re elected in 1964. There are streets, buildings, and even the first state ferry, named for him.
Ernest Gruening (18861974) was appointed Governor of the Territory of Alaska in 1939, and served in that position for fourteen years. He was elected to the United States Senate in 1958 and re elected in 1962.
Jay Hammond (19222005) was Governor during the building of the Alaska Pipeline and established the Alaska Permanent Fund, providing Alaskans with essentially free money. He is regarded as somewhat of a hero because of this. He was also governor during passage of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act and effectively served to moderate associated issues within the state among disparate interest groups ranging from conservationists to natives to pro development interests.
Fran Ulmer was the first woman elected to statewide officeshe became Lieutenant Governor in 1994.
George Sharrock (19102005) moved to the territory before statehood, eventually elected as the mayor of Anchorage and served during the Good Friday Earthquake in March 1964. This was the most devastating earthquake to hit Alaska and it sunk beach property, damaged roads and destroyed buildings all over the south central area. Sharrock, sometimes called the "earthquake mayor," led the city's rebuilding effort over six months.
Important cities and towns
Alaska's most populous city is Anchorage, home of 260,283 people, 225,744 of whom live in the urbanized area. It ranks third in the List of U.S. cities by area, behind two other Alaskan cities. Sitka ranks as America's largest city by area, followed closely by Juneau.
thumb 253px Sitka, Alaska Sitka Town
valign "top"
'''Cities of 100,000 or more people'''
Anchorage
'''Towns of 10,000 100,000 people'''
Fairbanks
Juneau
valign "top"
'''Towns of fewer than 10,000 people'''
Wasilla
Kodiak
Ketchikan
Ester
Sitka
Palmer
Cordova
width "50"
valign "top"
Bethel
Barrow
Kenai
Soldotna
Unalaska
Kotzebue
Nome
North Pole
Houston
width "50"
valign "top"
Petersburg
Homer
Dillingham
Valdez
Seward
Delta Junction
Glennallen
Circle
Unalakleet
25 richest places in Alaska
Ranked by per capita income:
valign "top"
1. Halibut Cove, Alaska 89,895
2. Chicken, Alaska 65,400
3. Edna Bay, Alaska 58,967
4. Sunrise, Alaska 56,000
5. Lowell Point, Alaska 45,790
6. Petersville, Alaska 43,200
7. Coldfoot, Alaska 42,620
8. Port Clarence, Alaska 35,286
9. Hobart Bay, Alaska 34,900
width "50"
valign "top"
10. Red Dog Mine, Alaska 34,348
11. Adak, Alaska 31,747
12. Meyers Chuck, Alaska 31,660
13. Pelican, Alaska 29,347
14. Ester, Alaska 29,155
15. Chignik Lagoon, Alaska 28,941
16. Four Mile Road, Alaska 28,465
17. Healy, Alaska 28,225
18. Moose Pass, Alaska 28,147
width "50"
valign "top"
19. Cube Cove, Alaska 27,920
20. Womens Bay, Alaska 27,746
21. Skagway, Alaska 27,700
22. Nelson Lagoon, Alaska 27,596
23. Valdez, Alaska 27,341
24. McKinley Park, Alaska 27,255
25. Attu Station, Alaska 26,964
See also: ''Richest Places in Alaska''
Colleges and universities
University of Alaska System
University of Alaska Anchorage
University of Alaska Fairbanks
University of Alaska Southeast
Alaska Bible College
Alaska Pacific University
Charter College
Ilisagvik College
Sheldon Jackson College
External links
Political parties
Category:Exclaves
Category:Russian people in the United States
Category:States of the United States
Category:1959 establishments
ar:
ast:Alaska
bg:
zh min nan:Alaska
bs:Aljaska
ca:Alaska
cs:Alja ka
cy:Alaska
da:Alaska
de:Alaska
et:Alaska
es:Alaska
eo:Alasko
eu:Alaska
fa:
fr:Alaska
ga:Alasca
gl:Alasca Alaska
ko:
hr:Aljaska
io:Alaska
ilo:Alaska
id:Alaska
iu:
is:Alaska
it:Alaska
he:
ka: ( )
ks:
kw:Alaska
la:Alasca
lv:A aska
lt:Aliaska
hu:Alaszka
mk:
ms:Alaska
nl:Alaska
ja:
no:Alaska
nn:Alaska
os:
pl:Alaska
pt:Alasca
ro:Alaska
ru:
sa:
sq:Alaska
simple:Alaska
sk:Alja ka
sl:Aljaska
sr:
fi:Alaska
sv:Alaska
th:
vi:Alaska
tr:Alaska
uk:
zh:
In modern usage, architecture is the art of creating an actual, implied or apparent plan of any complex object or system. The term can be used to connote the ''implied architecture'' of abstract things such as music or mathematics, the apparent architecture of natural things, such as geological formations or the structure of biological cells, or explicitly ''planned architectures'' of human made things such as software, computers, enterprises, and databases, in addition to buildings. In every usage, an architecture may be seen as a ''subjective mapping'' from a human perspective (that of the 'user' in the case of abstract or physical artifacts) to the elements or components of some kind of structure or system, which preserves the relationships among the elements components.
'''Architecture''' may refer to:
Architecture (built environment), the art and science of designing habitations, buildings, and building complexes classical architecture.
Architectural history studies the evolution and history of (built) architectures across the world through a consideration of various influences artistic, cultural, political, economic, and technological.
Architecture (other), a representation of an arbitrary abstract, natural, or man made structure of two or more interacting parts (e.g., architecture of mathematics, architecture of language, cytoarchitecture, cellular architecture, naval architecture, skelletal architecture, battlefield architecture). All systems can be said to have an architecture.
Biological architectures, the ''apparent'' architecture of biological structures. See cytoarchitecture, structural biology, cell architecture
Landscape architecture, the design of man made land constructs
Systems architecture, the representation of an engineered (or To Be Engineered) system, and the process and discipline for effectively implementing the design(s) for such a system. Such a system may consist of information and or hardware and or software.
Computer architecture, the systems architecture of a computer.
Software architecture, the systems architecture of a software system.
Enterprise architecture, a systems architecture, or framework, for aligning an organization's structure processes information operations projects with the organization's overall strategy
Information architecture, a systems architecture for structuring a knowledge based system
Product design, or product architecture, the systems design of a product or product family
Vehicle architecture, an automobile platform made from a set of components common to a number of different vehicles
af:Argitektuur
bg:
ca:Arquitectura
da:Arkitektur
de:Architektur
eo:Arkitekturo
es:Arquitectura
fa:
fi:Arkkitehtuuri
fr:Architecture
he:
ia:Architectura
it:Architettura
ja:
la:Architectura
lt:Architektra
lv:Arhitektura
nah:Arquitectura
nl:Architectuur
no:Arkitektur
pl:Architektura
pt:Arquitetura (desambigua o)
ro:Arhitectur
ru:
simple:Architecture
sl:Arhitektura
sr:
sv:Arkitektur
sw:Majenzi
ta:
zh:
REDIRECT Auteur theory
er in Germany working the land in the traditional way, with horse and plough.
in Sweden.
'''Agriculture''' is the process of producing food, feed, fiber and many other desired products by the cultivation of certain plants and the raising of domesticated animals (livestock). The practice of agriculture is also known as "farming", while scientists, inventors and others devoted to improving farming methods and implements are also said to be engaged in agriculture.
More people in the world are involved in agriculture as their primary economic activity than in any other, yet it only accounts for four percent of the world's GDP.! Source?
Overview
plantation in Java, Indonesia.
Agriculture sometimes refers to subsistence agriculture, the production of enough food to meet just the needs of the farmer agriculturalist and his her family. It may also refer to industrial agriculture, (often referred to as factory farming) long prevalent in developed nations and increasingly so elsewhere, which consists of obtaining financial income from the cultivation of land to yield produce, the commercial raising of animals (animal husbandry), or both.
Agriculture is also short for the ''study'' of the practice of agriculturemore formally known as agricultural science. Agricultural students are known (sometimes derisively) as "Aggies".
Increasingly, in addition to food for humans and animal feeds, agriculture produces goods such as cut flowers, ornamental and nursery plants, timber or lumber, fertilizers, animal hides, leather, industrial chemicals (starch, sugar, ethanol, alcohols and plastics), fibers (cotton, wool, hemp, and flax), fuels (methane from biomass, biodiesel) and both legal and illegal drugs (biopharmaceuticals, tobacco, marijuana, opium, cocaine). Genetically engineered plants and animals produce specialty drugs.
In the Western world, the use of gene manipulation, better management of soil nutrients, and improved weed control have greatly increased yields per unit area. At the same time, the use of mechanization has decreased labour requirements. The developing world generally produces lower yields, having less of the latest science, capital, and technology base.
Modern agriculture depends heavily on engineering and technology and on the biological and physical sciences. Irrigation, drainage, conservation and sanitary engineering, each of which is important in successful farming, are some of the fields requiring the specialized knowledge of agricultural engineers.
Agricultural chemistry deals with other vital farming concerns, such as the application of fertilizer, insecticides (see Pest control), and fungicides, soil makeup, analysis of agricultural products, and nutritional needs of farm animals.Plant breeding and genetics contribute additionally to farm productivity. Advanced seed engineering has allowed strains of seed to become perfect in every farming situation. Seeds can now germinate faster and adapt to shorter growing seasons in different climates. Present day seed can resist the spraying of pesticides that kill all green leaf plants. Hydroponics, a method of soilless gardening in which plants are grown in chemical nutrient solutions, may help meet the need for greater food production as the world's population increases.
The packing, processing, and marketing of agricultural products are closely related activities also influenced by science. Methods of quick freezing and dehydration have increased the markets for farm products (see Food preservation Meat packing industry).
Mechanization, the outstanding characteristic of late 19th and 20th century agricultural evolution, has eased much of the backbreaking toil of the farmer. More significantly, mechanization has enormously increased farm efficiency and productivity (see Agricultural machinery). Animals, including horses, mules, oxen, camels, llamas, alpacas, and dogs however, are still used to cultivate fields, harvest crops and transport farm products to markets in many parts of the world.
Airplanes, helicopters, trucks and tractors are used in agriculture for seeding, spraying operations for insect and disease control, Aerial topdressing, transporting perishable products, and fighting forest fires. Radio and television disseminate vital weather reports and other information such as market reports that concern farmers. Computers have become an essential tool for farm management.
.
According to the National Academy of Engineering in the US, agricultural mechanization is one of the 20 greatest engineering achievements of the 20th century. Early in the century, it took one American farmer to produce food for 2.5 people, where today, due to engineering technology (also, plant breeding and agrichemicals), a single farmer can feed over 130 people . This comes at a cost, however, of large amounts of energy input, from unsustainable, mostly fossil fuel, sources.
Animal husbandry means breeding and raising animals for meat or to harvest animal products (like milk, eggs, or wool) on a continual basis.
In recent years some aspects of industrial intensive agriculture have been the subject of increasing discussion. The widening sphere of influence held by large seed and chemical companies, meat packers and food processors has been a source of concern both within the farming community and for the general public. There has been increased activity of some people against some farming practices, raising chickens for food being one example. Another issue is the type of feed given to some animals that can cause Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy in cattle. There has also been concern because of the disastrous effect that intensive agriculture has on the environment. In the US, for example, fertilizer has been running off into the Mississippi for years and has caused a dead spot in the Gulf of Mexico, where the Mississippi empties. Intensive agriculture also depletes the fertility of the land over time and the end effect is that which happened in the Middle East, were some of the most fertile farmland in the world was turned into a desert by intensive agriculture.
The patent protection given to companies that develop new types of seed using genetic engineering has allowed seed to be licensed to farmers in much the same way that computer software is licensed to users. This has changed the balance of power in favor of the seed companies, allowing them to dictate terms and conditions previously unheard of. Some argue these companies are guilty of biopiracy.
Soil conservation and nutrient management have been important concerns since the 1950s, with the best farmers taking a stewardship role with the land they operate. However, increasing contamination of waterways and wetlands by nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus are of concern in many countries.
Increasing consumer awareness of agricultural issues has led to the rise of community supported agriculture, local food movement, slow food, and commercial organic farming, though these yet remain fledgling industries.
History
: ''Main article: History of agriculture''
Archaeobotanists Paleoethnobotanists have traced the selection and cultivation of specific food plant characteristics, such as a semi tough rachis and larger seeds, to just after the Younger Dryas (about 9,500 BC) in the early Holocene in the Levant region of the Fertile Crescent. Limited anthropological and archaeological evidence both indicate a grain grinding culture farming along the Nile in the 10th millennium BC using the world's earliest known type of sickle blades. There is even earlier evidence for conscious cultivation and seasonal harvest: grains of rye with domestic traits have been recovered from Epi Palaeolithic (10,000 BC) contexts at Abu Hureyra in Syria, but this appears to be a localised phenomenon resulting from cultivation of stands of wild rye, rather than a definitive step towards domestication. It is not until ca. 8,500 BC, in middle Eastern cultures referred to as Pre Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB), where there is the first definite evidence for the emergence of a widespread subsistence economy that was dependent on domesticated plants and animals. In these contexts lie the origins of the eight so called founder crops of agriculture: firstly emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, then hulled barley, pea, lentil, bitter vetch, chick pea and flax. These eight crops occur more or less simultaneously on PPNB sites in this region, although the consensus is that wheat was the first to be sown and harvested on a significant scale. There are many sites that date to between ca. 8,500 BC and 7,500 BC where the systematic farming of these crops contributed the major part of the inhabitants' diet. From the Fertile Crescent agriculture spread eastwards to Central Asia and westwards into Cyprus, Anatolia and, by 7,000 BC, Greece. Farming, principally of emmer and einkorn, reached northwestern Europe via southeastern and central Europe by ca. 4,800 BC (see, among others, Price, D. ed. 2000. ''Europe's First Farmers''. Cambridge University Press Harris, D. ed. 1996 ''The Origins and Spread of Agriculture in Eurasia''. UCL Press).
ploughing an alfalfa field
The reasons for the earliest introduction of farming may have included climate change, but possibly there were also social reasons (e.g. accumulation of food surplus for competitive gift giving). Most certainly there was a gradual transition from hunter gatherer to agricultural economies after a lengthy period when some crops were deliberately planted and other foods were gathered from the wild. Although localised climate change is the favoured explanation for the origins of agriculture in the Levant, the fact that farming was 'invented' at least three times, possibly more, suggests that social reasons may have been instrumental. In addition to emergence of farming in the Fertile Crescent, agriculture appeared by at least 6,800 BC in East Asia (rice) and, later, in Central and South America (maize, squash). Small scale agriculture also likely arose independently in early Neolithic contexts in India (rice) and Southeast Asia (taro).! Sources?
ian Harvester's sickle, 3000 BCE. Baked clay. Field Museum.
Full dependency on domestic crops and animals (i.e. when wild resources contributed a nutritionally insignificant component to the diet) was not until the Bronze Age. If the operative definition of ''agriculture'' includes large scale intensive cultivation of land, mono cropping, organised irrigation, and use of a specialized labour force, the title "inventors of agriculture" would fall to the Sumerians, starting ca. 5,500 BC. Intensive farming allows a much greater density of population than can be supported by hunting and gathering and allows for the accumulation of excess product to keep for winter use or to sell for profit. The ability of farmers to feed large numbers of people whose activities have nothing to do with material production was the crucial factor in the rise of standing armies. The agriculturalism of the Sumerians allowed them to embark on an unprecedented territorial expansion, making them the first empire builders. Not long after, the Egyptians, powered by effective farming of the Nile valley, achieved a population density from which enough warriors could be drawn for a territorial expansion more than tripling the Sumerian empire in area.! Sources?
The invention of a three field system of crop rotation during the Middle Ages vastly improved agricultural efficiency.
After 1492 the world's agricultural patterns were shuffled in the widespread exchange of plants and animals known as the Columbian Exchange.! Is this just Crosby's term or is it more widely used? Crops and animals that were previously only known in the Old World were now transplanted to the New and vice versa. Perhaps most notably, the tomato became a favorite in European cuisine, while certain wheat strains quickly took to western hemisphere soils and became a dietary staple even for native North, Central and South Americans.
By the early 1800s agricultural practices, particularly careful selection of hardy strains and cultivars, had so improved that yield per land unit was many times that seen in the Middle Ages and before, especially in the largely virgin lands of North and South America. With the rapid rise of mechanization in the 20th century, especially in the form of the tractor, the demanding tasks of sowing, harvesting and threshing could be performed with a speed and on a scale barely imaginable before. These advances have led to efficiencies enabling certain modern farms in the United States, Argentina, Israel, Germany and a few other nations to output volumes of high quality produce per land unit at what may be the practical limit.
Crops
World production of major crops in 2004
In millions of metric tons, based on FAO estimates:
By crop types
:Cereals 2,264
:Vegetables and melons 866
:Roots and Tubers 715
:Milk 619
:Fruit 503
:Meat 259
:Oilcrops 133
:Fish 130 (2001 estimate)
:Eggs 63
:Pulses 60
:Vegetable Fiber 30
By individual crops
:Sugar Cane 1,324
:Maize 721
:Wheat 627
:Rice 605
:Potatoes 328
:Sugar Beet 249
:Soybean 204
:Oil Palm Fruit 162
:Barley 154
:Tomato 120
Crop improvement
''See main article on'' Plant breeding
Domestication of plants is done in order to increase yield, improve disease resistance and drought tolerance, ease harvest and to improve the taste and nutritional value and many other characteristics. Centuries of careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. Plant breeders use greenhouses and other techniques to get as many as three generations of plants per year so that they can make improvements all the more quickly.
Plant selection and breeding in the 1920s and '30s improved pasture (grasses and clover) in New Zealand. Extensive radiation mutagenesis efforts (i.e. primitive genetic engineering) during the 1950s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat, corn and barley.! Source?
For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the USA have increased from around 2.5 tons per hectare (40 bushels per acre) in 1900 to about 9.4 t ha (150 bushels per acre) in 2001, primarily due to improvements in genetics. Similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t ha in 1900 to more than 2.5 t ha in 1990. South American average wheat yields are around 2 t ha, African under 1 t ha, Egypt and Arabia up to 3.5 to 4 t ha with irrigation. In contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as France is over 8 t ha. Higher yields are due to improvements in genetics, as well as use of intensive farming techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, growth control to avoid lodging).! Sources? Conversion note: 1 bushel of wheat 60 pounds (lb) 27.215 kg. 1 bushel of corn 56 pounds 25.401 kg
In industrialized agriculture, crop "improvement" has often reduced nutritional and other qualities of food plants to serve the interests of producers. After mechanical tomato harvesters were developed in the early 1960s, agricultural scientists bred tomatoes that were harder and less nutritious (Friedland and Barton 1975). In fact, a major longitudinal study of nutrient levels in numerous vegetables showed significant declines in the last 50 years garden vegetables in the U.S. today contain on average 38 percent less vitamin B2 and 15 percent less vitamin C (Davis and Riordan 2004).
Very recently, genetic engineering has begun to be employed in some parts of the world to speed up the selection and breeding process. The most widely used modification is a herbicide resistance gene that allows plants to tolerate exposure to glyphosate, which is used to control weeds in the crop. A less frequently used but more controversial modification causes the plant to produce a toxin to reduce damage from insects (c.f. Starlink).
There are specialty producers who raise less common types of livestock or plants.
Aquaculture, the farming of fish, shrimp, and algae, is closely associated with agriculture.
Apiculture, the culture of bees, traditionally for honeyincreasingly for crop pollination.
''See also'' : botany, List of domesticated plants, List of vegetables, List of herbs, List of fruit
Environmental problems
Agriculture may often cause environmental problems because it changes natural environments and produces harmful by products. Some of the negative effects are:
Nitrogen and phosphorus surplus in rivers and lakes.
Detrimental effects of herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, and other biocides.
Conversion of natural ecosystems of all types into arable land.
Consolidation of diverse biomass into a few species.
Erosion
Depletion of minerals in the soil
Particulate matter, including ammonia and ammonium off gasing from animal waste contributing to air pollution
Weeds feral plants and animals
Odor from agricultural waste
Soil salination .
Policy
Agricultural policy focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production. At the policy level, common goals of agriculture include:
Food safety: Ensuring that the food supply is free of contamination.
Food security: Ensuring that the food supply meets the population's needs.
Food quality: Ensuring that the food supply is of a consistent and known quality.
Conservation
Environmental impact
Economic stability
Agricultural Revolutions
British Agricultural Revolution
Green Revolution
Neolithic Revolution
Methods
There are various methods of agricultural production:
aeroponics
aerial topdressing
agricultural machinery
animal husbandry
aquaculture
beekeeping
crop rotation
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO, ''factory farming'')
composting
dairy farming
detasseling
domestication
fencing
fertilizers
greenhouse
harvest
heliciculture
hybrid seed
hydroponics
Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
irrigation
livestock
market gardening
monoculture
no till farming
organic farming
plant breeding
Permaculture
pollination management
precision farming
ranching
season extension
seed saving
seed testing
shepherding
subsistence farming
succession planting
sustainable agriculture
terracing
vegetable farming
tillage
weed control
References
Wells, Spencer: ''The Journey of Man : A Genetic Odyssey''. Princeton University Press, 2003. ISBN: 069111532X
Crosby, Alfred W.: ''The Columbian Exchange : Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492''. Praeger Publishers, 2003 (30th Anniversary Edition). ISBN: 0275980731
Collinson, M. (editor): ''A History of Farming Systems Research''. CABI Publishing, 2000. ISBN: 0851994059
Davis, Donald R., and Hugh D. Riordan (2004) Changes in USDA Food Composition Data for 43 Garden Crops, 1950 to 1999. Journal of the American College of Nutrition, Vol. 23, No. 6, 669 682.
Friedland, William H. and Amy Barton (1975) Destalking the Wily Tomato: A Case Study of Social Consequences in California Agricultural Research. Univ. California at Sta. Cruz, Research Monograph 15.
See also
Agricultural and Food Research Council, UK
Agricultural education
Agricultural science
Agricultural sciences basic topics
Arid zone agriculture
Barnyard
Community supported agriculture
International agricultural research
Family farm hog pen
Farm equipment
Land Allocation Decision Support System
List of domesticated animals
List of subsistence techniques
List of countries by agricultural output
List of sustainable agriculture topics
Permaculture
Protein per unit area
Timeline of agriculture and food technology.
USA agriculture
s in a green field
External links
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations World Agricultural Information Centre
The UN Statistical Databases
The FAOSTAT Statistical Databases
The FAO Statistics Division
and its with a focus on the impact of biotechnology
A summary for non specialists of the above FAO report by GreenFacts.
by John Zerzan
have a , for food, from afar
Specific countries
Agriculture Agri Food Canada
Agriculture of Pakistan
Agriculture at the United States National Academies
United States Department of Agriculture
from the Foreign Agricultural Service
from the Economic Research Service
from the Agricultural Research Service
ar:
an:Agricultura
ast:Agricultura
bg:
ca:Agricultura
cs:Zem d lstv
cy:Amaeth
da:Landbrug
de:Landwirtschaft
et:P llumajandus
es:Agricultura
eo:Agrikulturo
fa:
fr:Agriculture
fy:L nbou
gl:Agricultura
ko:
io:Agrokultivo
id:Pertanian
ia:Agricultura
iu:
is:Landb na ur
it:Agricoltura
he:
ka:
lad:Agrikultura
la:Agricultura
li:Landboew
hu:Mez gazdas g
mk:
nah:Millacayotl
nl:Landbouw
nds:Bueree
ja:
no:Landbruk
nn:Landbruk
pl:Rolnictwo
pt:Agricultura
ro:Agricultur
ru:
sh:Poljoprivreda
scn:Agricultura
simple:Agriculture
sl:Kmetijstvo
sr:
su:Agrikultur
fi:Maatalous
sv:Jordbruk
tl:Agrikultura
ta:
vi:N ng nghi p
uk:
zh:
'''Aldous Leonard Huxley''' (July 26, 1894 November 22, 1963) was a British writer who emigrated to the United States. He was a member of the famous Huxley family who produced a number of brilliant scientific minds. Best known for his novels and wide ranging output of essays, he also published short stories, poetry, travel writing, and film stories and scripts. Through his novels and essays Huxley functioned as an examiner and sometimes critic of social mores, societal norms and ideals, and possible misapplications of science in human life. While his earlier concerns might be called "humanist," ultimately, he became quite interested in "spiritual" subjects like parapsychology and mystically based philosophy, which he also wrote about. By the end of his life, Huxley was considered, in certain circles, a 'leader of modern thought'.
Biography
Early years
Huxley was born in Godalming, Surrey, England. He was the son of the writer Leonard Huxley by his first wife, Julia Arnold and grandson of Thomas Henry Huxley, one of the most important naturalists of the 19th Century, a man known as "Darwin's Bulldog." His brother Julian Huxley was a biologist also noted for his evolutionary theories. Huxley understandably excelled in the areas he took up professionally, for on his father's side were a number of noted men of science, while on his mother's were people of literary accomplishment.
Huxley was a lanky, delicately framed child who was gifted intellectually. His father was a professional herbalist as well as an author, so Aldous began his learning in his father's well equipped botanical laboratory, then continued in a school named Hillside, which his mother supervised for several years until she became terminally ill. From the age of nine, Aldous was then educated in the British boarding school system. He took readily to the handling of ideas.
His mother Julia died in 1908, when Aldous was only fourteen, and his sister Roberta died of an unrelated incident in the same month. Three years later Aldous suffered an illness (keratitis punctata) which seriously damaged his eyesight. His older brother Trev committed suicide in 1914. Aldous's near blindness disqualified him from service in World War I. Once his eyesight recovered, he was able to read English literature at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was a member of the Cambridge Apostles.
Maturing as a lean young man well over six feet in height, the cerebrotonic Huxley's initial interest in literature was primarily intellectual. While he was noted for his personal kindliness, only considerably later (some say under the influence of such friends as D.H. Lawrence) did he heartily embrace ''feelings'' as matters of importance in his evolving personal philosophy and literary expression.
Following his education at Balliol, Huxley was financially indebted to his father and had to earn a living. For a short while in 1918, he was employed acquiring provisions at the Air Ministry. But never desiring a career in administration (or in business), Huxley's lack of inherited means propelled him into applied literary work.
Huxley had completed his first (unpublished) novel at the age of seventeen and began writing seriously in his early twenties. He wrote great novels on dehumanising aspects of scientific progress, most famously ''Brave New World'', and on pacifist themes (e.g. ''Eyeless in Gaza''). Huxley was strongly influenced by F. Matthias Alexander and included him as a character in ''Eyeless in Gaza''.
Middle years
Already a noted satirist and social thinker, during World War I, Huxley spent much of his time at Garsington Manor, home of Lady Ottoline Morrell. Later, in ''Crome Yellow'' (1921) he caricatured the Garsington lifestyle. He married Maria Nys, whom he had met at Garsington. They had one child, Matthew, who grew up to be an epidemiologist.
Huxley moved to Hollywood, California in 1937 with his wife and friend Gerald Heard. Heard introduced Huxley to Vedanta and meditating. In Huxley's 1937 book ''Ends and Means'', most people in modern civilization agree that they want a world of 'liberty, peace, justice, and brotherly love', though they haven't been able to agree on how to achieve it. His book goes on to explore why the confusion or disagreement is there and what might be done about it.
In 1938 Huxley befriended J. Krishnamurti, whose teachings he greatly admired. He also became a Vedantist in the circle of Swami Prabhavananda, and he also introduced Christopher Isherwood to this circle. Not long after, Huxley wrote his book on widely held spiritual values and ideas, ''The Perennial Philosophy'', which discussed teachings of the world's great mystics.
For most of his life since the illness in his teens which left Huxley nearly blind, his eyesight was poor (despite the partial recovery which had enabled him to study at Oxford). Around 1939 he heard of the Bates Method for Natural Vision Improvement, and of a teacher (Margaret Corbett) who was able to teach him in the method. He claimed his sight improved dramatically as a result of using the method, then later wrote a book about it (The Art of Seeing) which was published in 1942 (US), 1943 (UK). He reported that for the first time in over 25 years, he was able to read without spectacles and without strain. He was a screenwriter for the 1940 production of Pride and Prejudice.
Later years
After World War II Huxley applied for United States citizenship, but was denied because he would not say he would take up arms to defend America. He became a vegetarian. Thereafter, his works were strongly influenced by mysticism and his experiences with the hallucinogenic drug mescaline, to which he was introduced by the psychiatrist Humphry Osmond in 1953. His years on psychoactive drugs were described as a paradise, washed down with bourbon, generally. He was a pioneer of self directed psychedelic drug use in a search for enlightenment, famously taking 100 micrograms of LSD as he lay dying. Huxley's psychedelic drug experiences are described in the essays ''The Doors of Perception'' (the title deriving from some lines in the book ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'' by William Blake) and ''Heaven and Hell''. The title of the former became the inspiration for the naming of the rock band, The Doors. Some of his writings on psychedelics became frequent reading among early hippies.
Huxley's main interest was not in just ''anything'' vague, mysterious, or subjective, but in what is sometimes termed "higher mysticism" he liked the term "perennial philosophy" that he used as the title of his noted book on the topic. During the 1950s, Huxley's interest in the related field of psychical research grew keener.
Huxley's wife, Maria, died of breast cancer in 1955, and in 1956 he remarried, to Laura Archera, who was herself an author and who wrote a biography of Aldous. In 1960, Huxley was diagnosed with throat cancer. In the years that followed, with his health deteriorating, he wrote the utopian novel ''Island'', and gave lectures on "Human Potentialities" at the Esalen institute. In 1959 Huxley, who remained a British Citizen, turned down an offer of a Knight Bachelor by the Macmillan government.
His ideas were foundational to the forming of the Human Potential Movement. He was also invited to speak at several prestigious American universities. At a speech given in 1961 at the California Medical School in San Francisco, Huxley warned: "There will be in the next generation or so a pharmacological method of making people love their servitude and producing dictatorship without tears, so to speak, producing a kind of painless concentration camp for entire societies so that people will in fact have their liberties taken away from them but will rather enjoy it," an idea not dissimilar to his contemporary writer J. B. Priestley's idea in The Magicians.
Huxley's views on the proper roles of science and technology (as he portrayed these, say, in ''Island'') are akin to some other noted English and American thinkers of the twentieth century, such as Lewis Mumford and Huxley's friend Gerald Heard (and, in some ways, Buckminster Fuller and E.F. Schumacher). Clearly, these men found descendants in some significant movers of a younger generation, e.g., Stewart Brand.
Via Gerald Heard, Huxley was introduced to the young Huston Smith, who went on to become a prolific and famous scholar on the religions of man. The two friends acquianted Smith with Vedanta and meditative practice. Later, while Huxley was a guest professor at M.I.T., he made introductions between Smith and Timothy Leary that lead to epiphanies Smith covers in his later book, ''Cleansing of the Doors of Perception''.sup sup
Amongst humanists, Huxley was considered an intellectual's intellectual. Although his financial circumstances had forced him to churn out articles and books, his thinking and ''best'' writing earned him an exalted esteem. His books were frequently on the required reading lists of English and modern philosophy courses in American colleges and universities. He was one of the twentieth century thinkers honoured in the Scribners Publishing's "Leaders of Modern Thought" series (a volume of biography and literary criticism by Philip Thody, ''Aldous Huxley'').
Death and afterwards
On his deathbed, unable to speak, he made a written request to his wife for "LSD, 100 g, i.m." She obliged, and he died peacefully the following morning, November 22, 1963. Media coverage of his death was overshadowed by news of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, which occurred on the same day, as did the death of the Irish author C. S. Lewis.
In all of Huxley's mature writings, one finds an awareness that seems to bridge the gap between "The Two Cultures" the sciences and the humanities. This gulf posed a potentially enormous problem, one that was recognized by other thinkers during Huxley's lifetime, such as C.P. Snow. The interest among professors of humanities and liberal arts in Huxley's work, both during the writer's lifetime and afterwards, rests on this consciousness on the part of the author, and of course on the artful and often humorous way in which he expressed himself.
Huxley's satirical, dystopian, and utopian novels seldom fail to stimulate thought. The same may be said for his essays and essay collections. Perhaps his main message is the tragedy that frequently follows from egocentrism, self centredness, and selfishness.
Films
Huxley wrote many screenplays, and many of his novels were later adapted for film or television.
Notable works include the original screenplay for Disney's animated ''Alice in Wonderland'', two productions of ''Brave New World'', one of ''Point Counter Point'', one of ''Eyeless in Gaza'', and one of ''Ape and Essence''. He was one of the screenwriters for the 1940 version of ''Pride and Prejudice'' and co wrote the screenplay for the 1944 version of ''Jane Eyre'' with John Houseman. Director Ken Russell's 1971 film ''The Devils'', starring Vanessa Redgrave, is adapted from Huxley's ''The Devils of Loudun'', and a 1990 made for television film adaptation of ''Brave New World'' was directed by Burt Brinckeroffer
Selected works
Novels
''Crome Yellow'' (1921)
''Antic Hay'' (1923)
''Those Barren Leaves'' (1925)
''Point Counter Point'' (1928)
''Brave New World'' (1932)
''Eyeless in Gaza'' (1936)
''After Many a Summer'' (1939)
''Time Must Have a Stop'' (1944)
''Ape and Essence'' (1948)
''The Genius and the Goddess'' (1955)
''Island'' (1962)
Short stories
''Limbo'' (1920)
''Mortal Coils'' (1922)
''Brief Candles'' (1930)
''Two or Three Graces''
''Little Mexican''
''The Young Arquimedes''
''Jacob's Hands A Fable'' (Late 1930s)
Poetry
''The Burning Wheel'' (1916)
''Jonah'' (1917)
''The Defeat of Youth'' (1918)
''Leda'' (1920)
''Arabia Infelix'' (1929)
''The Cicadias and Other Poems'' (1931)
Travel writing
''Along The Road'' (1925)
''Jesting Pilate'' (1926)
''Beyond the Mexique Bay'' (1934)
Essays
''Do What You Will'' (1929)
''The Olive Tree'' (1936)
''The Art of Seeing'' (1942)
''Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow'' (1952)
''The Doors of Perception'' (1954)
''Heaven and Hell'' (1956)
''Brave New World Revisited'' (1958)
''Literature and Science'' (1963)
Philosophy
''Ends and Means'' (1937)
''The Perennial Philosophy'' (1944) ISBN 006057058X
Biography
''Grey Eminence'' (1941)
''The Devils of Loudun'' (1952)
Children's literature
''The Crows of Pearblossom'' (1967)
Collections
''Text and Pretext'' (1933)
''Collected Short Stories'' (1957)
''Moksha: Writings on Psychedelics and the Visionary Experience'' (1977)
Quotes
On : "Great is truth, but still greater, from a practical point of view, is silence about truth. By simply not mentioning certain subjects... totalitarian propagandists have influenced opinion much more effectively than they could have by the most eloquent denunciations."
On the New World Order (1959): "And it seems to me perfectly in the cards that there will be within the next generation or so a pharmacological method of making people love their servitude, and producing a kind of painless concentration camp for entire societies, so that people will in fact have their liberties taken away from them but will rather enjoy it, because they will be distracted from any desire to rebel by propaganda, brainwashing, or brainwashing enhanced by pharmacological methods."
On : "One of the many reasons for the bewildering and tragic character of human existence is the fact that social organization is at once necessary and fatal. Men are forever creating such organizations for their own convenience and forever finding themselves the victims of their home made monsters."
Trivia
He was six feet four and a half inches tall
Studied ballet for several years
Was George Orwell's French teacher for a term at Eton.
Is shown on the cover of The Beatles album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band as number 18, in the top right hand corner.
External links
from the 1950's, exploring ''Brave New World'', ''Island'', and psychedelics
.
, the complete book
Website of the Island Foundation
(talk at UC Berkeley, March 20, 1962)
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
Huxley, Aldous
cs:Aldous Huxley
da:Aldous Huxley
de:Aldous Huxley
es:Aldous Huxley
eo:Aldous HUXLEY
eu:Aldous Huxley
fr:Aldous Huxley
hr:Aldous Huxley
it:Aldous Huxley
he:
ka: ,
nl:Aldous Huxley
ja:
pl:Aldous Huxley
pt:Aldous Huxley
ru: ,
simple:Aldous Huxley
sr:
fi:Aldous Huxley
sv:Aldous Huxley
th:
tr:Aldous Huxley
REDIRECT Abstract algebra
Meanings of '''Ada''':
People
Variant transliteration of Hebrew Adah.
Ada, Lady Lovelace
Ada, sister of Charlemagne, for whom the Ada Gospels at Trier were produced.
Ada, satrap of Caria, deposed by her brother Idrieus, restored by Alexander the Great
Places
Ada, Afghanistan
Ada, Saskatchewan, Canada
Ada, Ghana
Ada, Greece
Ada, Nigeria
Ada, Serbia
Ada, Oregon, USA (historical)
Ada County, Idaho, USA
Ada Division, Oklahoma, USA
Ada, Alabama, USA
Ada, Arkansas, USA
Ada, Kansas, USA
Ada, Louisiana, USA
Ada, Michigan, USA
Ada, Minnesota, USA
Ada, Ohio, USA
Ada, Oklahoma, USA
Ada, Virginia, USA
Ada, Wisconsin, USA
Ada, West Virginia, USA
Ada Township, Michigan, USA
Ada Township, North Dakota, USA
Ada Township, South Dakota, USA
Initialisms
Aeronautical Development Agency of India's Ministry of Defence
Air Defense Artillery a branch of the United States Army
American Decency Association
American Dental Association
American Diabetes Association
American Dietetic Association
Americans For Democratic Action
Americans with Disabilities Act
Aotearoa Digital Arts http: ada.waikato.ac.nz
Assistant district attorney
Average Daily Attendance
Other
Ada programming language
''Ada'', a genus of orchids
The short title of ''Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle'', a novel by Vladimir Nabokov (1969).
Ada, A demon, after which Adasaurus was named.
Ada , A film directed by Daniel Mann, with Susan Hayward y Dean Martin.
means "father" in Sindarin Elvish
da:Ada
de:Ada
es:ADA
eo:Ada
fr:Ada
hu:Ada
nn:Ada
pl:Ada
sv:Ada
tr:Ada (anlam ayr m)
'''Aberdeen''' may refer to:
Places
In Scotland:
Aberdeen, a major port city in north east Scotland
In Australia:
Aberdeen, New South Wales
In Canada:
Aberdeen Centre, an Asian themed shopping mall in Richmond, British Columbia.
Aberdeen, British Columbia two locations:
Aberdeen, Fraser Valley Regional District, British Columbia
Aberdeen, Thompson Nicola Regional District, British Columbia
Aberdeen, New Brunswick
Aberdeen, Nova Scotia
New Aberdeen, Nova Scotia
Aberdeen Bay, Nunavut
Aberdeen Lake, Nunavut
Aberdeen, Ontario two locations:
Aberdeen, Ontario (Grey County)
Aberdeen, Ontario (Prescott and Russell County)
Aberdeen Township, Ontario
Macdonald, Merideth and Aberdeen Additional, Ontario
Sheen Esher Aberdeen et Malakoff, Quebec
Aberdeen, Saskatchewan
Aberdeen No. 373, Saskatchewan
In China:
Aberdeen Harbour, Hong Kong
In South Africa:
Aberdeen, South Africa
In the United States:
Aberdeen, Arkansas
Aberdeen, California
Aberdeen, Florida
Aberdeen, Georgia
Aberdeen, Idaho
Aberdeen, Indiana
Aberdeen, Kentucky
Aberdeen, Massachusetts
Aberdeen, Maryland
Aberdeen, Mississippi
Aberdeen, Montana
Aberdeen Township, New Jersey
Aberdeen, North Carolina
Aberdeen, Ohio
Aberdeen, Pennsylvania
Aberdeen, South Dakota
Aberdeen, Texas
Aberdeen, Washington
Aberdeen, West Virginia
Other
Aberdeen (band), an American rock band.
Aberdeen (movie), a movie (2000) directed by Hans Petter Moland, starring Stellan Skarsg rd and Lena Headey.
Aberdeen City (band)
Aberdeen Proving Ground, a U.S. Army installation in Maryland.
cs:Aberdeen
de:Aberdeen (Begriffskl rung)
et:Aberdeen (t psustus)
fr:Aberdeen (homonymie)
gl:Aberdeen
pl:Aberdeen
:''This article is about an organism. See algae programming language for a programming language in computing.''
'''Algae''' (singular ''alga'') encompass several different groups of living organisms that capture light energy through photosynthesis, converting inorganic substances into simple sugars using the captured energy. Algae have been traditionally regarded as simple plants, and some are closely related to the higher plants. Others appear to represent different protist groups, alongside other organisms that are traditionally considered more animal like (that is, protozoa). Thus algae do not represent a single evolutionary direction or line, but a level of organization that may have developed several times in the early history of life on earth.
Algae range from single celled organisms to multi cellular organisms, some with fairly complex differentiated form and (if marine) called seaweeds. All lack leaves, roots, flowers, and other organ structures that characterize higher plants. They are distinguished from other protozoa in that they are photoautotrophic, although this is not a hard and fast distinction as some groups contain members that are mixotrophic, deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by osmotrophy, myzotrophy, or phagotrophy. Some unicellular species rely entirely on external energy sources and have reduced or lost their photosynthetic apparatus.
All algae have photosynthetic machinery ultimately derived from the cyanobacteria, and so produce oxygen as a by product of photosynthesis, unlike non cyanobacterial photosynthetic bacteria.
Algae are usually found in damp places or bodies of water and thus are common in terrestrial as well as aquatic environments. However, terrestrial algae are usually rather inconspicuous and far more common in moist, tropical regions than dry ones, because algae lack vascular tissues and other adaptions to live on land. Algae can endure dryness and other conditions in symbiosis with a fungus as lichen.
The various sorts of algae play significant roles in aquatic ecology. Microscopic forms that live suspended in the water columncalled '''phytoplankton'''provide the food base for most marine food chains. In very high densities (so called algal blooms) these algae may discolor the water and outcompete or poison other life forms. Seaweeds grow mostly in shallow marine waters. Some are used as human food or harvested for useful substances such as agar or fertilizer. The study of algae is called phycology or algology.
Relationships among algal groups
Prokaryotic algae
Traditionally the cyanobacteria have been included among the algae, referred to as the ''cyanophytes'' or ''Blue green Algae'', (the term "algae" refers to any aquatic organisms capable of photosynthesis), though some recent treatises on algae specifically exclude them. Cyanobacteria are some of the oldest organisms to appear in the fossil record, dating back about 3.8 billion years (Precambrian). Ancient cyanobacteria likely produced much of the oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere.
Cyanobacteria can be unicellular, colonial, or filamentous. They have a prokaryotic cell structure typical of bacteria and conduct photosynthesis directly within the cytoplasm, rather than in specialized organelles. Some filamentous blue green algae have specialized cells, termed heterocysts, in which nitrogen fixation occurs.
Eukaryotic algae
All other algae are eukaryotes and conduct photosynthesis within membrane bound structures (organelles) called chloroplasts. Chloroplasts contain DNA and are similar in structure to cyanobacteria, presumably representing reduced cyanobacterial endosymbionts. The exact nature of the chloroplasts is different among the different lines of algae, reflecting different endosymbiotic events. There are three groups (Archaeplastida) that have ''primary'' chloroplasts:
Green algae, together with higher plants
Red algae
Glaucophytes
In these groups, the chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes and probably developed through a single endosymbiosis. The chloroplasts of red algae have a more or less typical cyanobacterial pigmentation, while those of the green alga have chloroplasts with chlorophyll ''a'' and ''b'', the latter found in some cyanobacteria and not most. Higher plants are pigmented similarly to green algae and probably developed from them.
Two other groups of algae have green chloroplasts containing chlorophyll ''b'':
Euglenids and
Chlorarachniophytes.
These are surrounded by three and four membranes, respectively, and were probably retained from an ingested green alga. Those of the chlorarchniophytes contain a small nucleomorph, which is the remnant of the alga's nucleus. It has been suggested that the euglenid chloroplasts only have three membranes because they were acquired through myzocytosis rather than phagocytosis.
The remaining algae all have chloroplasts containing chlorophylls ''a'' and ''c''. The latter chlorophyll type is not known from any prokaryotes or primary chloroplasts, but genetic similarities with the red algae suggest a relationship there. These groups include:
Heterokonts (e.g., golden algae, diatoms, brown algae)
Haptophytes (e.g., coccolithophores)
Cryptomonads
Dinoflagellates
In the first three of these groups (Chromista), the chloroplast has four membranes, retaining a nucleomorph in cryptomonads, and they likely share a common pigmented ancestor. The typical dinoflagellate chloroplast has three membranes, but there is considerable diversity in chloroplasts among the group, as some members have acquired theirs from different sources. The Apicomplexa, a group of closely related parasites, also have plastids though not actual chloroplasts, which appear to have a common origin with those of the dinoflagellates.
Note many of these groups contain some members that are no longer photosynthetic. Some retain plastids, but not chloroplasts, while others have lost them entirely.
Forms of algae
Most of the simpler algae are unicellular flagellates or amoeboids, but colonial and non motile forms have developed independently among several of the groups. Some of the more common organizational levels, more than one of which may occur in the life cycle of a species, are:
''Colonial'' small, regular groups of motile cells
''Capsoid'' individual non motile cells embedded in mucilage
''Coccoid'' individual non motile cells with cell walls
''Palmelloid'' non motile cells embedded in mucilage
''Filamentous'' a string of non motile cells connected together, sometimes branching
''Parenchymatous'' cells forming a thallus with partial differentiation of tissues
In three lines even higher levels of organization have been reached, leading to organisms with full tissue differentiation. These are the brown algaesome of which may reach 70 m in length (kelps)the red algae, and the green algae. The most complex forms are found among the green algae (see Charales), in a lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants. The point where these non algal plants begin and algae stop is usually taken to be the presence of reproductive organs with protective cell layers, a characteristic not found in the other alga groups.
Algae and symbioses
Some species of algae form symbiotic relationships with other organisms. In these symbioses, the algae supply photosynthates (organic substances) to the host organism providing protection to the algal cells. The host organism derives some or all of its energy requirements from the alga. Examples include:
''lichens'' a fungus is the host, usually with a green alga or a cyanobacterium as its symbiont. Both fungal and algal species found in lichens are capable of living independently, although habitat requirements may be greatly different from those of the lichen pair.
''corals'' algae known as zooxanthellae are symbionts with corals. Notable amongst these is the dinoflagellate ''Symbiodinium'', found in many hard corals. The loss of ''Symbiodinium'', or other zooxanthellae, from the host is known as coral bleaching.
''sponges''
Uses of algae
Algae are used by man in a great many ways. Because many species are aquatic and microscopic, they are cultured in clear tanks or ponds and either harvested or used to treat effluents pumped through the ponds. Algae culture on a large scale is an important type of aquaculture in some places.
Energy source
Algae can be used to produce biodiesel (see algae culture), and by some estimates can produce vastly superior amounts of oil, compared to terrestrial crops grown for the same purpose. Because algae grown to produce biodiesel does not need to meet the requirements of a food crop, it is much cheaper to produce. Also it does not need fresh water or fertilizer (both of which are quite expensive).
Algae can be grown to produce hydrogen. In 1939 a German researcher named Hans Gaffron, while working at the University of Chicago, observed that the algae he was studying, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (a green algae), would sometimes switch from the production of oxygen to the production of hydrogen. Chlamydomonas moeweesi is also a good strain for the production of hydrogen.
Algae can be grown to produce biomass, which can be burned to produce heat and electricity.
Pollution control
Algae are used in wastewater treatment facilities, reducing the need for more dangerous chemicals.
Algae can be used to capture fertilizers in runoff from farms. If this algae is then harvested, it itself can be used as fertilizer.
Algae are used by some powerplants to reduce CO2 emissions. The CO2 is pumped into a pond, or some kind of tank, on which the algae feed.
Nutritional value of algae
Algae is commercially cultivated as a nutritional supplement. One of the most popular microalgal species is Spirulina (Arthrospira platensis), which is a Cyanobacteria (known as blue green algae), and has been hailed by some as a superfood. Other algal species cultivated for their nutritional value include Chlorella (a green algae), and Dunaliella (Dunaliella salina), which is high in beta carotene and is used in vitamin C supplements.
Algae is sometimes also used as a food, as in the Chinese "vegetable" known as ''fat choy'' (which is actually a cyanobacterium).
The oil from some algae have high levels of unsaturated fatty acids. Arachidonic acid(a polyunsaturated fatty acid), is very high in parietochloris incisa, (a green algae) where it reaches up to 47 of the triglyceride pool (Bigogno C et al. Phytochemistry 2002, 60, 497).
FDA on algal oil use in food products
The natural pigments produced by algae can be used as an alternative to chemical dyes and coloring agents. Many of the paper products used today are not recyclable because of the chemical inks that they use, paper recyclers have found that inks made from algae are much easier to break down. There is also much interest in the food industry into replacing the coloring agents that are currently used with coloring derived from algal pigments.
See also
Algae culture
Brown Algae
Coccolithophore
Cyanobacteria
Diatom
Golden Algae
Green Algae
Important publications in phycology
Red Algae
Yellow Green Algae
External links
a wiki based site that is focused on energy production from algae.
biodiesel production biodiesel from algae
Sydney Botanic Gardens
Rural Chemical Industries (Aust.) Pty Ltd.
National Office for Marine Biotoxins and Harmful Algal Blooms, USA.
Smithsonian Institution
Algae
Category:Botany
ar:
bg:
ca:Alga
da:Alge
de:Alge
et:Vetikad
es:Alga
eo:Algo
fr:Algue
gl:Alga
it:Alga
he:
lt:Dumbliai
lv:A es
mk:
nl:Algen
ja:
no:Alge
nn:Alge
pl:Glony
pt:Alga
ru:
sl:Alge
sr:
sv:Alg
ta:
zh:
In statistics, '''analysis of variance''' ('''ANOVA''') is a collection of statistical models and their associated procedures which compare means by splitting the overall observed variance into different parts. The initial techniques of the analysis of variance were pioneered by the statistician and geneticist Ronald Fisher in the 1920s and 1930s, and is sometimes known as '''Fisher's ANOVA''' or '''Fisher's analysis of variance'''.
Overview
There are three conceptual classes of such models:
Fixed effects model assumes that the data come from normal populations which differ in their means.
Random effects models assume that the data describe a hierarchy of different populations whose differences are constrained by the hierarchy.
Mixed models describe situations where both fixed and random effects are present.
The fundamental technique is a partitioning of the total sum of squares into components related to the effects in the model used. For example, we show the model for a simplified ANOVA with one type of treatment at different levels. (If the treatment levels are quantitative and the effects are linear, a linear regression analysis may be appropriate.)
: mathSS hbox Total SS hbox Error SS hbox Treatments . math
The number of degrees of freedom (abbreviated ''df'') can be partitioned in a similar way and specifies the chi square distribution which describes the associated sums of squares.
: mathdf hbox Total df hbox Error df hbox Treatments . math
Fixed effects model
The fixed effects model of analysis of variance applies to situations in which the experimenter has subjected his experimental material to several treatments, each of which affects only the mean of the underlying normal distribution of the "response variable".
Random effects model
Random effects models are used to describe situations in which incomparable differences in experimental material occur. The simplest example is that of estimating the unknown mean of a population whose individuals differ from each other. In this case, the variation between individuals is ''confounded'' with that of the observing instrument.
Degrees of freedom
Degrees of freedom indicates the effective number of observations which contribute to the sum of squares in an ANOVA, the total number of observations minus the number of linear constraints in the data.
Tests of significance
Analyses of variance lead to tests of statistical significance using Fisher's F distribution.
See also
ANCOVA
MANOVA
Important publications in analysis of variance
Multiple comparisons
Duncan's new multiple range test
External links
Category:Statistics
de:Varianzanalyse
es:An lisis de varianza
fr:Analyse de la variance
gl:An lise da varianza
it:Analisi della varianza
nl:Variantie analyse
pl:Analiza wariancji
sl:Analiza variance
su:Analisis varian
REDIRECT Analysis of variance
:''For saturated hydrocarbons containing one or more rings, see Cycloalkane.''
An '''alkane''' in organic chemistry is a saturated hydrocarbon without cycles, that is, an acyclic hydrocarbon in which the molecule has the maximum possible number of hydrogen atoms and so has no double bonds. Alkanes are aliphatic compounds.
The general formula for alkanes is '''Csubn subHsub2n 2 sub''' the simplest possible alkane is therefore methane, CHsub4 sub. The next simplest is ethane, Csub2 subHsub6 sub the series continues indefinitely. Each carbon atom in an alkane has sp hybridization.
Alkanes are also known as paraffins, or collectively as the ''paraffin series''. These terms also used for alkanes whose carbon atoms form a single, unbranched chain. Such branched chain alkanes are called ''isoparaffins''.
Isomerism
The atoms in alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in multiple ways, forming different isomers. "Normal" alkanes have a linear, unbranched configuration. The number of isomers increases rapidly with the number of carbon atoms for alkanes with 1 to 12 carbon atoms, the number of isomers equals 1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 18, 35, 75, 159, and 355, respectively .
Nomenclature of alkanes
The names of all alkanes end with ''' ane'''.
Alkanes with unbranched carbon chains
The first four members of the series (in terms of number of carbon atoms) are named as follows:
:methane, CHsub4 sub
:ethane, Csub2 subHsub6 sub
:propane, Csub3 subHsub8 sub
:butane, Csub4 subHsub10 sub
Alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by adding the suffix ''' ane''' to the appropriate numerical multiplier with elision of a terminal '' a '' from the basic numerical term. Hence, pentane, Csub5 subHsub12 sub hexane, Csub6 subHsub14 sub heptane, Csub7 subHsub16 sub octane, Csub8 subHsub18 sub etc. For a more complete list, see List of alkanes.
Straight chain alkanes are sometimes indicated by the prefix ''n '' (for ''normal'') to distinguish them from branched chain alkanes having the same number of carbon atoms. Although this is not strictly necessary, the usage is still common in cases where there is an important difference in properties between the straight chain and branched chain isomers: e.g. ''n'' hexane is a neurotoxin while its branched chain isomers are not.
Alkanes with branched carbon chains
Branched alkanes are named as follows:
Identify the longest straight chain of carbon atoms.
Number the atoms in this chain, starting from 1 at one end and counting upwards to the other end.
Examine the groups attached to the chain in order and form their names.
Form the name by looking at the different attached groups, and writing, for each group, the following:
The number, or numbers, of the carbon atom, or atoms, where it is attached.
The prefixes ''di '', ''tri '', ''tetra '', etc. if the group is attached in 2, 3, 4, etc. places, or nothing if it is attached in only one place.
The name of the attached group.
The formation of the name is finished by writing down the name of the longest straight chain.
To carry out this algorithm, we must know how to name the substituent groups. This is done by the same method, except that instead of the longest chain of carbon atoms, the longest chain starting from the attachment point is used also, the numbering is done so that the carbon atom next to the attachment point has the number 1.
For example, the compound
image:isobutane.png
is the only 4 carbon alkane possible, apart from butane. Its formal name is 2 methylpropane.
Pentane, however, has two branched isomers, in addition to its linear, normal form:
image:dimethylpropane.pngbr
2,2 dimethylpropane
and
image:2 methylbutane.png br
2 methylbutane.
Trivial names
The following nonsystematic names are retained in the IUPAC system:
:isobutane for 2 methylpropane
:isopentane for 2 methylbutane
:neopentane for 2,2 dimethylpropane
The name ''isooctane'' is very widely used in the petrochemical industry to refer to 2,2,4 trimethylpentane.
Occurrence
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Alkanes occur both on Earth and in the solar system, however only the first hundred or so, and even then mostly only in traces. The light hydrocarbons, especially methane and ethane for example, have been detected both in the tail of the comet Hyakutake and in some meteorites such as carbonaceous chondrites. They also form an important portion of the atmospheres of the outer gas planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. On Titan, the satellite of Saturn, it is believed that there were once large oceans of these and longer chain alkanes: smaller seas of liquid ethane are thought still to exist there.
Traces of methane (about 0.0001 or 1 ppm) occur in the Earth's atmosphere, produced primarily by forms of Archaea. The content in the oceans is negligible due to the low solubility in water: however, at high pressures and low temperatures, methane can co crystallize with water to form a solid methane hydrate. Although they cannot be commercially exploited at the present time, the calorific value of the known methane hydrate fields exceeds the energy content of all the natural gas and oil deposits put togethermethane extracted from methane hydrate is considered therefore a candidate for future fuels.
Today, the most important commercial sources for alkanes are clearly natural gas and oil, which are the only organic compounds to occur as minerals in nature. Natural gas contains primarily methane and ethane, with some propane and butane: oil is a mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons. Both were formed when dead marine animals and plants (zooplankton and phytoplankton) sank to the bottom of ancient seas and were covered with sediments in an anoxic environment (ie lacking in oxygen) and converted over many millions of years at high temperatures and high pressure to their current form. Natural gas resulted thereby for example from the following reaction:
:Csub6 subHsub12 subOsub6 sub 3CHsub4 sub 3COsub2 sub
These hydrocarbons collected in porous rocks, trapped beneath an impermeable cap rock. In contrast to methane, which is constantly reformed in large quantities, higher alkanes rarely develop to a considerable extent in nature. The present deposits will not be reformed once they are exhausted.
Solid alkanes occur as evaporation residues from oil, known as tar. One of the largest natural deposits of solid alkanes is in the asphalt lake known as the Pitch Lake in Trinidad and Tobago.
Purification and use
! Translated from :de:Alkane
at Martinez, California.
Alkanes are both important raw materials of the chemical industry and the most important fuels of the world economy.
The starting materials for the processing are always natural gas and crude oil. The latter is separated in an oil refinery by fractional distillation and processed into many different products, for example gasoline. The different "fractions" of crude oil have different boiling points and can be isolated and separated quite easily: within the individual fractions the boiling points lie closely together.
The domain of usage of a certain alkane can be determined quite well according to the number of carbon atoms, although the following demarcation is idealized and not perfect. The first four alkanes are used mainly for heating and cooking purposes, and in some countries for electricity generation. Methane and ethane are the main componants of natural gas they are normally stored as gases under pressure. It is however easier to transport them as liquids: this requires both compression and cooling of the gas.
Propane and butane can be liquefied at fairly low pressures, and are well known as '''liquified petroleum gas (LPG)'''. Propane, for example, is used in the propane gas burner, butane in disposable cigarette lighters (where the pressure is a mere 2 bar). The two alkanes are used as propellants in aerosol sprays.
From pentane to octane the alkanes are highly volatile liquids. They are used as fuels in internal combustion engines, as they vaporise easily on entry into the combustion chamber without forming droplets which would impair the unifomity of the combustion. Branched chain alkanes are preferred, as they are much less prone to premature ignition which causes knocking than their straight chain homologues. This propensity to premature ignition is measured by the octane rating of the fuel, where 2,2,4 trimethylpentane (''isooctane'') has an arbitrary value of 100 and heptane has a value of zero. Apart from their use as fuels, the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar substances.
Alkanes from nonane to, for instance, hexadecane (an alkane with sixteen carbon atoms) are liquids of higher viscosity, less and less suitable for use in gasoline. They form instead the major part of diesel and aviation fuel. Diesel fuels are charaterised by their cetane number, cetane being an old name for hexadecane. However the higher melting points of these alkanes can cause problems at low temperatures and in polar regions, where the fuel becomes too thick to flow correctly.
Alkanes from hexadecane upwards form the most important components of fuel oil and lubricating oil. In latter function they work at the same time as anti corrosive agents, as their hydrophobic nature means that water cannot reach the metal surface. Many solid alkanes find use as paraffin wax, for example in candles. This should not be confused however with true wax, which consists primarily of esters.
Alkanes with a chain length of approximately 35 or more carbon atoms are found in bitumen, used for example in road surfacing. However the higher alkanes have little value and are usually split into lower alkanes by cracking.
Preparation
Numerous ways exist to prepare alkanes in the laboratory. The most well known methods are hydrogenation of alkenes and hydrolysis of Grignard reagents. Alkanes can also be prepared directly from alkyl halides in the Corey House Posner Whitesides reaction. The Barton McCombie deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups from alcohols and the Clemmensen reduction removes carbonyl groups from aldehydes and ketones to form alkanes.
Molecular geometry
! Translated from :de:Alkane
.
The molecular structure of the alkanes directly affects their physical and chemical characteristics. It is derived from the electron configuration of carbon, which has four valence electrons. The carbon atoms in alkanes are always spsup3 sup hybridised, that is to say that the valence electrons are said to be in four equivalent orbitals derived from the combination of the 2s orbital and the three 2p orbitals. These orbitals, which have identical energies, are arranged spatially in the form of a tetrahedron, the angle of 109.47 between them.
Bond lengths and bond angles
! Translated from :de:Alkane
An alkane molecule has only CH and CC single bonds. The former result from the overlap of a sp orbital of carbon with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen the latter by the overlap of two sp orbitals on different carbon atoms. The bond lengths amount to 1.09 10sup10 supm for a CH bond and 1.54 10sup10 supm for a CC bond.
The spatial arrangement of the bonds is similar to that of the four sp orbitalsthey are tetrahedrally arranged, with an angle of 109.47 between them. Structural formulae which represent the bonds as being at right angles to one another, while both common and useful, do not correspond with the reality.
Conformation
! Translated from :de:Alkane
The structural formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient to completely describe the geometry of a molecule. There is a further degree of freedom for each carboncarbon bond: the torsion angle between the atoms or groups bound to the atoms at each end of the bond. The spatial arrangement described by the torsion angles of the molecule is known as its conformation.
Ethane
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Ethane forms the simplest case for studying the conformation of alkanes, as there is only one CC bond. If one looks down the axis of the CC bond, then one will see the so called Newman projection: The circle represents the two carbon atoms, one behind the other, and the bonds to hydrogen are represented by the straight lines. The hydrogen atoms on both the front and rear carbon atoms have an angle of 120 between them, resulting from the projection of the base of the tetrahedron onto a flat plane. However the torsion angle between a given hydrogen atom attached to the front carbon and a given hydrogen atom attached to the rear carbon can vary freely between 0 and 360 . This is a consequence of the free rotation about a carboncarbon single bond. Despite this apparent freedom, only two limiting conformations are important:
In the '''eclipsed conformation''', corresponding to a torsion angle of 0 , 120 or 240 , the hydrogen atoms attached to the front carbon are directly in front of those attached to the rear carbon.
In the '''staggered conformation''', corresponding to a torsion angle of 60 , 180 or 300 , the hydrogen atoms attached to the front carbon are exactly in between those attached to the rear carbon.
The two conformations, also known as rotomers, differ in energy: The staggered conformation is 12.6kJ mol lower in energy (more stable) than the eclipsed conformation. The explanation for this difference in energy has been the subject of debate, with two main theories predominating:
in the eclipsed conformation, the electrostatic repulsion between the electrons in the carbonhydrogen bonds is maximised.
in the staggered conformation, the hyperconjugation (a form of delocalisation) of the valence electrons is maximised.
These two explanations are not contradictory or exclusive the latter is thought to be the more important for ethane itself.
This difference in energy between the two conformations, known as the torsion energy, is low compared to the thermal energy of an ethane molecule at ambient temperature. There is constant rotation about the CC bond, albeit with short "pauses" at each staggered conformation. The time taken for an ethane molecule to pass from one staggered conformation to the next, equivalent to the rotation of one CHsub3 sub group by 120 relative to the other, is of the order of 10sup11 supseconds.
Higher alkanes
! Translated from :de:Alkane
The situation with respect to the two CC bonds in propane is qualitatively similar to that of ethane: it is more complex, however, for butane and higher alkanes.
If one takes the central CC bond of butane as the reference axis, each of the two central carbon atoms is bound to two hydrogen atoms and a methyl group. Four different conformations can be defined by the torsion angle between the two methyl groups and, as in the case of ethane, each has its characteristic energy.
The '''fully eclipsed''' or '''synperiplanar''' conformation has a torsion angle of 0 . It is the configuration with the highest energy.
The '''inclined''' conformation has a torsion angle of 60 (or 300 ). It is a local energy minimum.
The '''partially eclipsed''' conformation has a torsion angle of 120 (or 240 ). It is a local energy maximum.
The '''antiperiplanar''' conformation has a torsion angle of 180 . The two methyl groups are as far from each other as is possible, and this configuration has the lowest energy.
The difference in energy between the fully eclipsed conformation and the antiperiplanar conformation is about 19kJ mol, and is therefore still relatively small at ambient temperature.
The case of higher alkanes is similar: the antiperiplanar conformation is always the most favoured around each carboncarbon bond. For this reason, alkanes are usually shown in a zigzag arrangement in diagrams or in models. The actual structure will always differ somewhat from these idealised forms, as the differences in energy between the conformations are small compared to the thermal energy of the molecules: alkane molecules have no fixed structural form, whatever the models may suggest.
The conformations of other organic molecules are based on those of alkanes, and are discussed in the relevant articles.
Properties
Physical properties
! Translated from :de:Alkane
The molecular structure, particularly the surface area of the molecule, determines the boiling point of the alkane: the smaller the surface, the lower the boiling point, as the van der Waals forces between the molecules are weaker. A reduction of the surface area can be achieved by chain branching or by a circular structure. This means in practice that alkanes with higher number of carbon atoms usually have higher boiling points than those with lower numbers of carbon atoms, and that branched chain alkanes and cycloalkanes have lower boiling points than their straight chain homologues. Under standard conditions, from CHsub4 sub to Csub4 subHsub10 sub alkanes are gaseous from Csub5 subHsub12 sub to Csub17 subHsub36 sub they are liquids and after Csub18 subHsub38 sub they are solids. The boiling point increases between 20 and 30C per CHsub2 sub group.
The melting points of the alkanes also rise with the increase in the number of carbon atoms (with only one exception, propane). However the melting points rise more slowly than the boiling points, in particular for the higher alkanes. In addition, the melting points of alkanes with an odd number of carbon atoms increase faster than the melting points of alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms (see figure): the cause of this phenomenon is the higher packing density of the alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms. The melting points of branched chain alkanes can be either higher or lower than those of the corresponding straight chain alkanes, depending on the efficiency of molecular packing: this is particularly true for isoalkanes (2 methyl isomers), which often have melting points higher than those of their normal analogues.
Alkanes do not conduct electricity, nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field. For this reason they do not form hydrogen bonds and are insoluble in polar solvents such as water. Since the hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule, the coexistance of an alkane and water leads to an increase in molecular order (a reduction in entropy). As there is no significant bonding between water molecules and alkane molecules, the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this reduction in entropy should be minimised by minimising the contact between alkane and water: alkanes are said to be hydrophobic in that they repel water.
Their solubility in nonpolar solvents is relatively good, a property which is called lipophilicity. Different alkanes are, for example, miscible in all proportions among themselves.
The density of the alkanes usually increases with increasing number of carbon atoms, but remains less than that of water. Hence, alkanes form the upper layer in an alkane water mixture.
Chemical properties
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Alkanes generally show a relatively low reactivity, because their CH and CC bonds are relatively stable and cannot be easily broken. Unlike all other organic compounds, they possess no functional groups.
They react only very poorly with ionic or other polar substances. The p''K''suba sub values of all alkanes are above 60, and so they are practically inert to acids and bases. This inertness is the source of the term ''paraffins'' (Latin ''para'' ''affinis'', with the meaning here of "lacking affinity"). In crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically unchanged for millions of years.
However redox reactions of alkanes, in particular with oxygen and the halogens, are possible as the carbon atoms are in a strongly reduced condition in the case of methane, the lowest possible oxidation state for carbon (4) is reached. Reaction with oxygen leads to combustion with halogens, substitution. In addition, alkanes have been shown to interact with, and bind to, certain transition metal complexes.
Free radicals, molecules with unpaired electrons, play a large role in most reactions of alkanes, such as cracking and reformation where long chain alkanes are converted into shorter chain alkanes and straight chain alkanes into branched chain isomers.
In highly brached alkanes, the bond angles may differ significantly from the optimal value (109.5) in order to allow the different groups sufficient space. This causes a tension in the molecule, known as steric hinderance, and can substantially increase the reactivity.
Thermochemistry
Alkanes are stable molecules relative to their constituent elements, which is manifested as a negative heat of formation. For linear alkanes, each methylene (CHsub2 sub) unit contributes 5 kcal mol to the overal heat of formation. Branched alkanes are always a little bit more stable than their linear isomers for example, 2 methylbutane is more stable than ''n'' pentane by 1.8 kcal mol, and 2,2 methylpropane is more stable than ''n'' pentane by 5 kcal mol.
See the alkane heat of formation table for detailed data.
Spectroscopic properties
Virtually all organic compounds contain carboncarbon and carbonhydrogen bonds, and so show some of the features of alkanes in their spectra. Alkanes are notable for having no other groups, and therefore for the ''absence'' of other characreistic spectroscopic features.
Infrared spectroscopy
The carbonhydrogen stretching mode gives a strong absorption between 2850 and 2960cmsup1 sup, while the carboncarbon stretching mode absorbes between 800 and 1300cmsup1 sup. The carbonhydrogen bending modes depend on the nature of the group: methyl groups show bands at 1450cmsup1 sup and 1375cmsup1 sup, while methylene groups show bands at 1465cmsup1 sup and 1450cmsup1 sup. Carbon chains with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption at around 725cmsup1 sup.
NMR spectroscopy
The proton resonances of alkanes are usually found at subH sub 01. The carbon 13 resonances depend on the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon: subC sub 830 (methyl), 1555 (methylene), 2060 (methyne). The carbon 13 resonance of quaternary carbon atoms is characteristically weak, due to the lack of nuclear Overhauser enhancement and the long relaxation time: it can be missed in routine spectra.
Mass spectrometry
Alkanes have a high ionisation energy, and the molecular ion is usually weak. The fragmentation pattern can be difficult to interpret, but, in the case of branched chain alkanes, the carbon chain is preferentially cleaved at tertiary or quaternary carbons due to the relative stability of the resulting free radicals. The fragment resulting from the loss of a single methyl group (M15) is often absent, and other fragment are often spaced by intervals of fourteen mass units, corresponding to sequential loss of CHsub2 sub groups.
Reactions
Reactions with oxygen
All alkanes react with oxygen in a combustion reaction, although they become increasing difficult to ignite as the number of carbon atoms increases. The general equation for complete combustion is:
:2Csub''n'' subHsub2''n'' 2 sub (3''n'' 1)Osub2 sub 2(''n'' 1)Hsub2 subO 2''n''COsub2 sub
In the absence of sufficient oxygen, carbon monoxide or even soot can be formed, as shown below for methane:
:2CHsub4 sub 3Osub2 sub 2CO 4Hsub2 subO
:CHsub4 sub Osub2 sub C 2Hsub2 subO
Alkanes usually burn with a non luminous flame with very little soot formation.
The standard enthalpy change of combustion, subc sub''H''supso s sup, for alkanes increases by about 650kJ mol per CHsub2 sub group. Branched chain alkanes have lower values of subc sub''H''supso s sup than straight chain alkanes of the same number of carbon atoms, and so can be seen to be somewhat more stable.
Reactions with halogens
Alkanes react with halogens in a so called halogenation reaction. The hydrogen atoms of the alkane are progressively replaced, or substituted, by halogen atoms. Free radicals are the reactive species which participate in the reaction, which usually leads to a mixture of products. The reaction is highly exothermic, and can lead to an explosion.
The chain mechanism is as follows, using the chlorination of methane as a typical example:
:'''1.''' ''Initiation'': splitting of a chlorine molecule to form two chlorine atoms, initiated by ultraviolet radiation. A chlorine atom has an unpaired electron and acts as a free radical.
::Clsub2 sub 2Cl
:'''2.''' ''Propagation'' (two steps): a hydrogen atom is pulled off from methane then the methyl radical pulls a Cl from Clsub2 sub.
::CHsub4 sub Cl CHsub3 sub HCl
::CHsub3 sub Clsub2 sub CHsub3 subCl Cl
:This results in the desired product plus another chlorine radical. This radical will then go on to take part in another propagation reaction causing a chain reaction. If there is sufficient chlorine, other products such as CHsub2 subClsub2 sub may be formed.
:'''3.''' ''Termination'': recombination of two free radicals:
::Cl Cl Clsub2 sub or
::CHsub3 sub Cl CHsub3 subCl or
::CHsub3 sub CHsub3 sub Csub2 subHsub6 sub.
:The last possibility in the termination step will result in an impurity in the final mixture notably this results in an organic molecule with a longer carbon chain than the reactants.
In the case of methane or ethane, all the hydrogen atoms are equivalent and have an equal chance of being replaced. This leads to what is known as a ''statistical product distribution''. For propane and higher alkanes, the hydrogen atoms which form part of CHsub2 sub (or CH) groups are preferentially replaced.
The reactivity of the different halogens varies considerably: the relative rates are: fluorine (108) chlorine (1) bromine (710sup11 sup) iodine (210sup22 sup). Hence the reaction of alkanes with fluorine is difficult to control, that with chlorine is moderate to fast, that with bromine is slow and requires high levels of UV irradiation while the reaction with iodine is practically non existent and thermodynamically unfavorable.
These reactions are an important industrial route to halogenated hydrocarbons.
Cracking and reforming
"Cracking" breaks larger molecules into smaller ones. This can be done with a thermic or catalytic method. The thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism, that is, bonds break symmetrically and thus pairs of free radicals are formed. The catalytic cracking process involves the presence of acid catalysts (usually solid acids such as silica alumina and zeolites) which promote a heterolytic (asymmetric) breakage of bonds yielding pairs of ions of opposite charges, usually a carbocation and the very unstable hydride anion. Carbon localized free radicals and cations are both highly unstable and undergo processes of chain rearrangement, C C scission in position beta (i.e., cracking) and intra and intermolecular hydrogen transfer or hydride transfer. In both types of processes, the corresponding reactive intermediates (radicals, ions) are permanently regenerated, and thus they proceed by a
self propagating chain mechanism. The chain of reactions is eventually terminated by radical or ion recombination.
Here is an example of cracking with butane CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub3 sub
1st possibility (48 ): breaking is done on the CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub bond.
CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub3 sub
after a certain number of steps, we will obtain an alkane and an alkene:
CHsub4 sub CHsub2 sub CH CHsub3 sub
2nd possibility (38 ): breaking is done on the CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub bond.
CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub3 sub
after a certain number of steps, we will obtain an alkane and an alkene
from different types: CHsub3 sub CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub
3rd possibility (14 ): breaking of a C H bond
after a certain number of steps, we will obtain an alkene and hydrogen gas: CHsub2 sub CH CHsub2 sub CHsub3 sub Hsub2 sub
Other reactions
! translated from :de:Alkane
Alkanes will react with steam in the presence of a nickel catalyst to give hydrogen. Alkanes can by chlorosulfonated and nitrated, although both reactions require special conditions. The fermentation of alkanes to carboxylic acids is of some technical importance. In the Reed reaction, sulfur dioxide, chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to sulfonyl chlorides.
Hazards
Methane is explosive in when mixed with air (18 CHsub4 sub) and is a strong greenhouse gas: other lower alkanes can also form explosive mixtures with air. The lighter liquid alkanes are highly flammable, although this risk decreases with the length of the carbon chain. Pentane, hexane, heptane and octane are classed as ''dangerous for the environment'' and ''harmful''. The straight chain isomer of hexane is a neurotoxin, and therefore rarely used commercially.
Alkanes in nature
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Although alkanes occur in nature in various way, they do not rank biologically among the essential materials. Cycloalkanes with 14 to 18 carbon atoms occur in musk, extracted from deer of the family Moschidae. All further information refers to acyclic alkanes.
Bacteria and archaea
! Translated from :de:Alkane
ic archaea in the gut of this cow are responsible for some of the methane in the Earth's atmosphere.
Certain types of bacteria can metabolise alkanes: they prefer even numbered carbon chains as they are easier to degrade than odd numbered chains.
On the other hand certain archaea, the methanogens, produce large quantites of methane by the metabolism of carbon dioxide or other oxidised organic compounds. The energy is released by the oxidation of hydrogen:
:COsub2 sub 4Hsub2 sub CHsub4 sub 2Hsub2 subO
Methanogens are also the producers of marsh gas in wetlands, and release about two billion tonnes of methane per yearthe atmospheric content of this gas is produced nearly exclusively by them. The methane output of cattle and other herbivores, which can release up to 150litres per day, and of termites, is also due to methanogens. They also produce this simplest of all alkanes in the intestines of humans. Methanogenic archaea are hence at the end of the carbon cycle, with carbon being released back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis. It is probable that our current deposits of natural gas were formed in a similar way.
Fungi and plants
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Alkanes also play a role, if a minor role, in the biology of the three eukaryotic groups of organisms: fungi, plants and animals. Some specialised yeasts, e.g. ''Candida tropicale'', ''Pichia'' sp., ''Rhodotorula'' sp., can use alkanes as a source of carbon and or energy. The fungus ''Amorphotheca resinae'' prefers the longer chain alkanes in aviation fuel, and can cause serious problems for aircraft in tropical regions.
In plants it is the solid long chain alkanes that are found they form a firm layer of wax, the cuticle, over areas of the plant exposed to the air. This protects the plant against water loss, while preventing the leaching of important minerals by the rain. It is also a protection against bacteria, fungi and harmful insectsthe latter sink with their legs into the soft waxlike substance and have difficulty moving. The shining layer on fruits such as apples consists of long chain alkanes. The carbon chains are usually between twenty and thirty carbon atoms in length and are made by the plants from fatty acids. The exact composition of the layer of wax is not only species dependent, but changes also with the season and such environmental factors as lighting conditions, temperature or humidity.
Animals
! Translated from :de:Alkane
Alkanes are found in animal products, although they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons. On example is the shark liver oil, which is approximately 14 pristane (2,6,10,14 tetramethylpentadecane, Csub19 subHsub40 sub). Their occurrence is more important in pheromones, chemical messenger materials, on which above all insects are dependent for communication. With some kinds, as the support beetle ''Xylotrechus colonus'', primarily pentacosane (Csub25 subHsub52 sub), 3 methylpentaicosane (Csub26 subHsub54 sub) and 9 methylpentaicosane (Csub26 subHsub54 sub), they are transferred by body contact. With others like the tsetse fly ''Glossina morsitans morsitans'', the pheromone contians the four alkanes 2 methylheptadecane (Csub18 subHsub38 sub), 17,21 dimethylheptatriacontane (Csub39 subHsub80 sub), 15,19 dimethylheptatriacontane (Csub39 subHsub80 sub) and 15,19,23 trimethylheptatriacontane (Csub40 subHsub82 sub), and
acts by smell over longer distances, a useful characteristic for pest control.
Ecological relations
! Translated from :de:Alkane
One example, in which both plant and animal alkanes play a role, is the ecological relationship between the sand bee (''Andrena nigroaenea'') and the early spider orchid (''Ophrys sphegodes'') the latter is dependent for pollination on the former. Sand bees use pheromones in order to identify a mate in the case of ''A. nigroaenea'', the females emit a mixture of tricosane (Csub23 subHsub48 sub), pentacosane (Csub25 subHsub52 sub) and heptacosane (Csub27 subHsub56 sub) in the ratio 3:3:1, and males are attracted by specifically this odour. The orchid takes advantage of this mating arrangement to get the male bee to collect and disseminate its pollen parts of its flower not only resemble the appearance of sand bees, but also produce large quantities of the three alkanes in the same ratio as female sand bees. As a result numerous males are lured to the blooms and attempte to copulate with their imaginary partner: although this endeavour is not crowned with success for the bee, it allows the orchid to transfer its pollen,
which will be dispersed after the departure of the frustrated male to different blooms.
See also
Cycloalkane
Higher alkanes
Alkene
Alkyne
Functional group
Cracking (chemistry)
List of alkanes
Category:Hydrocarbons
Category:Alkanes
ar:
bg:
ca:Alc
cs:Alkan
da:Alkan
de:Alkane
et:Alkaanid
el:
es:Alcano
eo:Alkano
fr:Alcane
ko:
it:Alcani
he:
lv:Alk ni
nl:Alkaan
ja:
nn:Alkan
pl:Alkan
pt:Alcano
ru:
sk:Alk n
sr:
su:Alkana
fi:Alkaani
sv:Alkan
vi:Ankan
zh:
:''This article is about the legal term. For other usages see Appeal (disambiguation).''
An '''appeal''' is the act or fact of challenging a judicially cognizable and binding judgment to a higher judicial authority. In common law jurisdictions, most commonly, this means formally filing a notice of appeal with a lower court, indicating one's intention to take the matter to the next higher court with jurisdiction over the matter, and then actually filing the appeal with the appropriate appellate court.
United States
The United States legal system generally recognizes two types of appeals: a trial ''de novo'' or an appeal on the record.
A trial de novo is usually available for review of informal proceedings conducted by administrative agency, referees, masters, commissioners and some minor judicial tribunals in proceedings that do not provide all the procedural attributes of a formal judicial trial. If unchallenged, these decisions have the power to settle more minor legal disputes once and for all. If a party is dissatisfied with the finding of such a tribunal, one generally has the power to request a trial ''de novo'' by a court of record. In such a proceeding, all issues and evidence may be developed newly, as though never heard before, and one is not restricted to the evidence heard in the lower proceeding. Sometimes, however, the decision of the lower proceeding is itself admissible as evidence, thus helping to curb frivolous appeals.
In an appeal on the record from a decision in a judicial proceeding, both appellant and respondent are bound to base their arguments wholly on the proceedings and body of evidence as they were presented in the lower tribunal. Each seeks to prove to the higher court that the result they desired was the just result. Precedent and case law figure prominently in the arguments. In order for the appeal to succeed, the appellant must prove that the lower court committed reversible error, that is, an impermissible action by the court acted to cause a result that was unjust, and which would not have resulted had the court acted properly. Some examples of reversible error would be erroneously instructing the jury on the law applicable to the case, permitting seriously improper argument by an attorney, admitting or excluding evidence improperly, acting outside the court's jurisdiction, injecting bias into the proceeding or appearing to do so, juror misconduct, etc. The failure to formally object at the time, to what one views as improper action in the lower court, may result in the affirmance of the lower court's judgment on the grounds that one did not "preserve the issue for appeal" by objecting.
In cases where a judge rather than a jury decided issues of fact, an appellate court will apply an ''abuse of discretion'' standard of review. Under this standard, the appellate court gives deference to the lower court's view of the evidence, and reverses its decision only if it was a clear abuse of discretion. This is usually defined as a decision outside the bounds of reasonableness. On the other hand, the appellate court normally gives less deference to a lower court's decision on issues of law, and may reverse if it finds that the lower court applied the wrong legal standard.
In some rare cases, an appellant may successfully argue that the law under which the lower decision was rendered was unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, or may convince the higher court to order a new trial on the basis that evidence earlier sought was concealed or only recently discovered. In the case of new evidence, there must be a high probability that its presence or absence would have made a material difference in the trial. Another issue suitable for appeal in criminal cases is effective assistance of counsel. If a defendant has been convicted and can prove that his lawyer did not adequately handle his case ''and'' that there is a reasonable probability that the result of the trial would have been different had the lawyer given competent representation, he is entitled to a new trial.
An appellate court is a court that hears cases in which a lower court either a trial court or a lower level appellate court has already made a decision, but in which at least one party to the action wants to challenge this ruling based upon some legal grounds that are allowed to be appealed either by right or by leave of the appellate court. These grounds typically include errors of law, fact, or due process.
In different jurisdictions, appellate courts are also called appeals courts, courts of appeals, superior courts, or supreme courts.
Who can appeal
A party who files an appeal is called an ''appellant'', and a party on the other side is an ''appellee'' or ''respondent'' or, in some jurisdictions, the party who files is known as a ''petitioner'' and the party being sued is designated the ''respondent''. Cross appeals can also occur, when more than one party to a case is unhappy with the decision in some way, often when the winning party claims that more damages were deserved than were awarded.
An appeal ''as of right'' is one that is guaranteed by statute or some underlying constitutional or legal principle. The appellate court cannot refuse to listen to the appeal. An appeal ''by leave'' or ''permission'' requires the appellant to move for leave to appeal in such a situation either or both of the lower court and the appellate court have the discretion to grant or refuse the appellant's demand to appeal the lower court's decision.
In tort, equity, or other civil matters either party to a previous case may file an appeal. In criminal matters, however, the state or prosecution generally has no appeal ''as of right''. And due to the double jeopardy principle, the state or prosecution may never appeal a jury or bench verdict. But in some jurisdictions, the state or prosecution may appeal ''as of right'' from a trial court's dismissal of an indictment in whole or in part or from a trial court's granting of a defendant's suppression motion. Likewise, in some jurisdictions, the state or prosecution may appeal an issue of law ''by leave'' from the trial court and or the appellate court.
How an appeal is processed
Generally speaking the appellate court examines the record of evidence presented in the trial court and the law that the lower court applied and decides whether that decision was legally sound or not. The appellate court will typically be deferential to the lower court's findings of fact (such as whether a defendant committed a particular act), unless clearly erroneous, and so will focus on the court's application of the law to those facts (such as whether the act found by the court to have occurred fits a legal definition at issue).
If the appellate court finds no defect, it "affirms" the judgment. If the appellate court does find a legal defect in the decision "below" (i.e., in the lower court), it may "modify" the ruling to correct the defect, or it may nullify ("reverse" or "vacate") the whole decision or any part of it. It may in addition send the case back ("remand" or "remit") to the lower court for further proceedings to remedy the defect.
In some cases an appellate court may review a lower court decision ''de novo'' (or completely), challenging even the lower court's findings of fact. This might be the proper standard of review, for example, if the lower court resolved the case by granting a pre trial motion to dismiss or motion for summary judgment which is usually based only upon written submissions to the trial court and not on any trial testimony.
Another situation is where appeal is by way of ''re hearing''. Certain jurisdictions permit certain appeals to cause the trial to be heard afresh in the appellate court. An example would be an appeal from a Magistrate's court to the Crown Court in England and Wales.
Sometimes the appellate court finds a defect in the procedure the parties used in filing the appeal and dismisses the appeal without considering its merits, which has the same effect as affirming the judgment below. (This would happen, for example, if the appellant waited too long, under the appellate court's rules, to file the appeal.) In England and many other jurisdictions, however, the phrase ''appeal dismissed'' is equivalent to the U.S. term ''affirmed'' and the phrase ''appeal allowed'' is equivalent to the U.S. term ''reversed''.
Generally there is no trial in an appellate court, only consideration of the record of the evidence presented to the trial court and all the pre trial and trial court proceedings are reviewed unless the appeal is by way of re hearing, new evidence will usually only be considered on appeal in ''very'' rare instances, for example if that material evidence was unavailable to a party for some very significant reason such as prosecutorial misconduct.
In some systems an appellate court will only consider the written decision of the lower court, together with any written evidence that was before that court and is relevant to the appeal. In other systems, the appellate court will normally consider the record of the lower court. In those cases the record will first be certified by the lower court.
The appellant has the opportunity to present arguments for the granting of the appeal and the appellee (or respondent) can present arguments against it. Arguments of the parties to the appeal are presented through their appellate lawyers, if represented, or ''pro se'' if the party has not engaged legal representation. Those arguments are presented in written briefs and sometimes in oral argument to the court at a hearing. At such hearings each party is allowed a brief presentation at which the appellate judges ask questions based on their review of the record below and the submitted briefs.
It is important to note that in an adversarial system appellate courts do not have the power to review lower court decisions unless a party appeals it. Therefore if a lower court has ruled in an improper manner or against legal precedent that judgment will stand even if it might have been overturned on appeal.
In the United States, a lawyer traditionally starts an oral argument to any appellate court with the words "May it please the court."
See also
List of legal topics
Appellate review
Supreme Court of the United States
Court of Appeal of England and Wales
Category:Court systems
Category:Appellate review
cs:Apela n soud
de:Berufung (Recht)
es:Apelaci n
hu:Fellebbez s
ja:
nl:Hoger beroep
pl:Apelacja (prawo)
pt:Recurso de apela o
sv:Appellationsdomstol
th:
zh:
''For the US radical anti war protest group, see A.N.S.W.E.R.''
''See also Google Answers, Answers.com''
An '''answer''' (derived from ''and'', against, and the same root as ''swear'') was originally a solemn assertion in opposition to some one or something, and thus generally any counter statement or defence, a reply to a question or objection, or a correct solution of a problem. In the common law, an '''answer''' is the first pleading by a defendant, usually filed and served upon the plaintiff within a certain strict time limit after a civil complaint or criminal information or indictment has been served upon the defendant. It may have been preceded by an ''optional'' "pre answer" motion to dismiss or demurrer if such a motion is unsuccessful, the defendant ''must'' file an answer to the complaint or risk an adverse default judgment.
The ''answer'' establishes which allegations (cause of action in civil matters) set forth by the complaining party will be contested by the defendant, and states all the defendant's defenses, thus establishing the nature and parameters of the controversy to be decided by the court.
In the case of a criminal case there is usually an arraignment or some other kind of appearance before the court by the defendant. The pleading in the criminal case, which is entered on the record in open court, is either guilty or not guilty. Generally speaking in private, civil cases there is no guilt or innocence. There is only a judgment that grants money damages or some other kind of equitable remedy such as restitution or an injunction. Criminal cases may lead to fines or other punishment, such as imprisonment.
The famous Latin ''Responsa Prudentum'' ("answers of the learned") were the accumulated views of many successive generations of Roman lawyers, a body of legal opinion which gradually became authoritative.
In music an "'''answer'''" is the technical name in counterpoint for the repetition by one part or instrument of a theme proposed by another.
G.
sup garrett
1902 1807
1983 1861
1872 1961
(back)
1309 1827
1931 1962
REDIRECT Aircraft carrier
'''Arraignment''' is a common law term for the formal reading of a criminal complaint, in the presence of the defendant, to inform him of the charges against him. In response to arraignment, the accused is expected to enter a plea. Acceptable pleas vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but they generally include "guilty", "not guilty", and the peremptory pleas (or pleas in bar), which set out reasons why a trial cannot proceed. In addition, US jurisdictions allow pleas of "nolo contendere" (no contest) and the "Alford plea" in some circumstances.
In the UK arraignment is the first of eleven stages in a criminal trial, and involves the clerk of the court reading out the indictment. The defendant is asked whether they plead guilty or not guilty to each individual charge.
Guilty and Not Guilty pleas
If the defendant pleads guilty an evidentiary hearing usually follows. The court is not required to accept a guilty plea. During that hearing the judge will assess the offense, mitigating factors, and the defendant's character and then pass sentence. If the defendant pleads not guilty, a date will be set for a preliminary hearing or trial.
What if the defendant enters no plea?
In the past, a defendant who refused to plea (or, "stood mute") would be subjected to peine forte et dure (Law French for "strong and hard punishment"). But today in all common law jurisdictions, defendants who refuse to enter a plea will have a plea of not guilty entered for them on their behalf.
The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure
The US ''Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure'' state: "...arraignment shall... consist of an open...reading of the indictment...to the defendant...and calling on him to plead thereto. He shall be given a copy of the indictment...before he is called upon to plead."
category:legal terms
Category:Prosecution
"'''America the Beautiful'''" is an American patriotic song which rivals "The Star Spangled Banner", the national anthem of the United States, in popularity. It is often found in Christian hymnals in a wide variety of churches in the United States, and may be sung as part of a Christian service of worship to God.
History
The words are by Katharine Lee Bates, an English teacher at Wellesley College. She had taken a train trip to Colorado Springs, Colorado in 1893 to teach a short summer school session at Colorado College, and several of the sights on her trip found their way into her poem:
The World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Illinois, the "White City" with its promise of the future contained within its alabaster buildings.
The wheat fields of Kansas, through which her train was riding on July 4.
The majestic view of the Great Plains from atop Pike's Peak.
On that mountain, the words of the poem started to come to her, and she wrote them down upon returning to her hotel room at the original Antlers Hotel. The poem was initially published two years later in ''The Congregationalist'', to commemorate the Fourth of July. It quickly caught the public's fancy. Amended versions were published in 1904 and 1913.
Several existing pieces of music were adapted to the poem. The hymn ''Materna'', composed in 1882 by Samuel A. Ward, was generally considered the best music as early as 1910 and is still the popular tune today. Ward had been similarly inspired. The tune came to him while he was on a ferryboat trip from Coney Island back to his home in New York City after a leisurely summer day, and he immediately wrote it down. Ward died in 1903, not knowing the national stature his music would attain. Miss Bates was more fortunate, as the song's popularity was well established by her death in 1929.
At various times in the more than 100 years that have elapsed since the song as we know it was born, particularly during the John F. Kennedy administration, there have been efforts to give "America the Beautiful" legal status either as a national hymn, or as a national anthem equal to, or in place of, "The Star Spangled Banner", but so far this has not succeeded. Proponents prefer "America the Beautiful" for various reasons, saying it is easier to sing, more melodic, and more adaptable to new orchestrations while still remaining as easily recognizable as "The Star Spangled Banner." Some prefer "America the Beautiful" over "The Star Spangled Banner" due to the latter's war oriented imagery. (Others prefer "The Star Spangled Banner" for the same reason.) While that national dichotomy has stymied any effort at changing the tradition of the national anthem, "America the Beautiful" continues to be held in high esteem by a large number of Americans.
Popularity of the song soared following the September 11, 2001 attacks at some sporting events it was sung in addition to the traditional singing of the national anthem.
Ray Charles is credited with the song's most well known rendition in current times (although Elvis Presley had a good success with it in the 70 s). His recording is very commonly played at major sporting events, such as the Super Bowl. His unique take on it places the third verse first, after which he sings the usual first verse. In the third verse (see below), the author scolds the materialistic and self serving robber barons of her day, and urges America to live up to its noble ideals and to honor, with both word and deed, the memory of those who died for their country...a message that resonates just as strongly today.! Agreed. Also see the entire set of 1913 lyrics (source listed below) where this antimaterialist, God centered theme is repeated in one of the forgotten to most American's ears "extra" lyrics.
An amusing oddity of the song is that its meter (technically "common meter double" or 8 6 8 6 8 6 8 6) is identical to that of ''Auld Lang Syne''. The two songs can be sung perfectly with lyrics interchanged.
Lyrics
Oh beautiful, for spacious skies,br
For amber waves of grain,br
For purple mountain majestiesbr
Above the fruited plain!br
''America! America! God shed his grace on thee,''br
''And crown thy good with brotherhood, from sea to shining sea.''br br
Oh beautiful, for pilgrims' feetbr
Whose stern, impassioned stressbr
A thoroughfare for freedom beatbr
Across the wilderness!br
''America! America! God mend thine ev'ry flaw ''br
''Confirm thy soul in self control, thy liberty in law!''br br
Oh beautiful, for heroes provedbr
In liberating strife,br
Who more than self their country lovedbr
And mercy more than life!br
''America! America! May God thy gold refine,''br
'''Til all success be nobleness, and ev'ry gain divine!''br br
Oh beautiful, for patriot's dreambr
That sees beyond the years!br
Thine alabaster cities gleambr
Undimmed by human tears!br
''America! America! God shed his grace on thee,''br
''And crown thy good with brotherhood, from sea to shining sea!''
Takeoffs
A song as popular and familiar as "America the Beautiful" inevitably gets used out of its proper context or time frame, for humorous effect. As the song seems to have "always been there", it is often presented as if Christopher Columbus had written it when he arrived at the New World (though in fact, Columbus never set foot on North America all his voyages were to the Caribbean islands, South and Central America). Some examples:
In 1971, the song inspired the cross country Cannonball Baker Sea To Shining Sea Memorial Trophy Dash race from New York to Los Angeles that later was the topic of several movies with Burt Reynolds
A ''Far Side'' cartoon from 1982 (reprinted in Sherr's book) shows Columbus nearing land, with his crew of ''conquistador'' types, and saying, "Look, gentlemen! Purple mountains! Spacious skies! Fruited plains! ... Is someone writing this down?"
In one of his comedy club routines in the early 1960s, Flip Wilson did a Columbus story with an African American twist... ironically, the catchphrase repeated by Queen Isabel (an early "Geraldine") is "Chris gon' find Ray Charles!" When his Columbus sees land, he comments, "It's America, all right... just look at those spacious skies... those amber waves of grain... dig that purple mountain's majesty... I'll bet there's fruit out there on the plain!"
In his satirical, musical record album, ''The United States of America, Volume 1'', Stan Freberg plays Columbus, Jesse White plays a skeptical King Ferdinand, and Colleen Collins does Queen Isabella (mimicking Tallulah Bankhead), resulting in this bit of dialogue:
:Ferdinand: Look at him in that hat! Is that a crazy sailor?
:Isabella: Crazy? I'll tell you how crazy! He's a man with a dream, a vision, a vision of a new world, whose alabaster cities gleam undimmed by human tears, with purple mountain majesties above the Two Cents Plain . . .
:Ferdinand and Columbus: Fruited!
:Isabella: Fruited.
Mel Brooks, on a talk show, once did an impression of how Frank Sinatra might sing the song, complete with tuxedo, black hat and coat, and cigarette, leaning up against a bar, and rendering the song in "lounge style".
George Carlin performed a satirical version around 1970, when environmental issues were becoming a hot political topic:
:Oh beautiful, for smoggy skies, insecticided grain
:For strip mined mountain's majesty above the asphalt plain.
:America, America, man sheds his waste on thee
:And hides the pines with billboard signs, from sea to oily sea!
Wellesley College students and alumnae tend to change "brotherhood" to "SISTERhood" in renditions of the song.
Books
Lynn Sherr's 2001 book ''America the Beautiful'' discusses the origins of the song and the backgrounds of its authors in depth. ISBN 1 58648 085 5.
Sources external links
(Click on "History" on the top left hand corner of index to access page)
Category:Patriotic songs
Category:Christian hymns
'''Assistive Technology''' (AT) is a generic term that includes assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices and the process used in selecting, locating, and using them. AT promotes greater independence for people with disabilities by enabling them to perform tasks that they were formerly unable to accomplish, or had great difficulty accomplishing, by providing enhancements to or changed methods of interacting with the technology needed to accomplish such tasks. According to disability advocates, technology, all too often, is created without regard to people with disabilities, and unnecessary barriers make new technology inaccessible to hundreds of millions.
Universal (or broadened) accessibility, or universal design means excellent usability, particularly for people with disabilities. But, argue advocates of assistive technology, universally accessible technology yields great rewards to the typical user good accessible design ''is'' universal design, they say. The classic example of an assistive technology that has improved everyone's life is the "curb cuts" in the sidewalk at street crossings. While these curb cuts surely enable pedestrians with mobility impairments to cross the street, they have also aided parents with carriages and strollers, shoppers with carts, and travellers and workers with pull type bags, not to mention skateboarders and inline skaters.
Consider an example of an assistive technology. The modern telephone is, except for the deaf, universally accessible. Combined with a text telephone (also known as a TDD Telephone Device for the Deaf and in the USA generally called a TTY TeleTYpewriter ), which converts typed characters into tones that may be sent over the telephone line, the deaf person is able to communicate immediately at a distance. Together with "relay" services (where an operator reads what the deaf person types and types what a hearing person says) the deaf person is then given access to everyone's telephone, not just those of people who possess text telephones. Many telephones now have volume controls, which are primarily
intended for the benefit of people who are hard of hearing, but can be useful for all
users at times and places where there is significant background noise.
Another example: calculators are cheap, but a person with a mobility impairment can have difficulty using them. Speech recognition software could recognize short commands and make use of calculators a little easier. People with cognitive disabilities would appreciate the simplicity others would as well.
Toys which have been adapted to be used by children with disabilities, may have advantages for "typical" children as well. The Lekotek movement assists parents by lending assistive technology toys and expertise to families.
Telecare is a particular sort of assistive technology that uses electronic sensors connected to an alarm system to help caregivers manage risk and help vulnerable people stay independent at home longer. A good example would be the systems being put in place for senior people such as fall detectors, thermometers (for hypothermia risk), flooding and unlit gas sensors (for people with mild dementia). The principle being that these alerts can be customised to the particular person's risks. When the alert is triggered, a message is sent to a carer or contact centre who can respond appropriately. The range of sensors is wide and expanding rapidly.
Technology similar to Telecare can also be used to act within a person's home rather than just to respond to a detected crisis. Using one of the examples above, unlit gas sensors for people with dementia can be used to trigger a device that turns off the gas and tells someone what has happened. This is safer than just telling an external person that there is a problem.
Designing for people with dementia is a good example of where the design of the interface of a piece of assistive technology (AT) is critical to its usefulness. It is important to make sure that people with dementia or any other identified user group are involved in the design process to make sure that the design is accessible and useable. In the example above, a voice message could be used to remind the person with dementia to turn of the gas himself, but who's voice should be used, and what should the message say? Questions like these must be answered through user consultantion, involvement and evaluation.
Assistive technology products
Standing frames support wheelchair users in a standing position, increasing their reach, as well as improving their health and self esteem.
Magnifiers magnify computer displays for people with some degree of visual impairment.
Sticky keys, a feature of Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X operating systems allowing key combinations (such as Control Alt Delete) to be pressed in sequence rather than simultaneously.
Screen readers allow blind people to use computers by communicating what is on the screen via speech or Braille.
Refreshable Braille display, used to convert on screen text to Braille characters.
Reading machines allow blind people to access printed material.
CCTV (Closed Circuit Television) or Video Magnifier, magnifies printed text for people with low vision.
Further reading
Behrmann, M. Schaff, J.(2001). Assisting educators with assistive technology: Enabling children to achieve independence in living and learning. Children and Families 42(3), 24 28.
Bishop, J. (2003). The Internet for educating individuals with social impairments. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 19(4), 546 556. Available as a free
Cain, S. (2001). Accessing Technology Using technology to support the learning and employment opportunities for visually impaired users. Royal National Institute for the Blind. ISBN 1858785170.
Cook, A., Hussey, S. (2002). Assistive Technologies Principles and Practice, 2nd Edition. Mosby. ISBN 0323006434
Franklin, K.S. (1991). Supported employment and assistive technology A powerful partnership. In S.L. Griffin W.G. Revell (Eds.), Rehabilitation counselor desktop guide to supported employment. Richmond, VA : Virginia Commonwealth University Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Supported Employment.
Lahm, E., Morrissette, S. (1994, April). Zap 'em with assistive technology. Paper presented at the annual meeting of The Council for Exceptional Children, Denver, CO.
Lee, C. (1999). Learning disabilities and assistive technologies an emerging way to touch the future. Amherst, MA: McGowan Publications.
McKeown, S. (2000). Unlocking Potential How ICT can support children with special needs. The Questions Publishing Company Ltd. ISBN 1841900419
Nisbet, P. Poon, P. (1998). Special Access Technology. The CALL Centre, University of Edinburgh. Available as a free The CALL Centre. ISBN 189804211X
Nisbet, P., Spooner, R., Arthur, E. Whittaker P. (1999). Supportive Writing Technology. The CALL Centre, University of Edinburgh. Available as a free The CALL Centre. ISBN 1898042136
Rose, D. Meyer, A. (2000). Universal design for individual differences. Educational Leadership, 58(3), 39 43.
Orpwood, R. Design methodology for aids for the disabled. J Med Eng Technol. 1990 Jan Feb 14(1):2 10.
Adlam, T. et al. The installation and support of internationally distributed equipment for people with dementia." IEEE transactions on information technology in biomedicine (1089 7771) yr:2004 vol:8 iss:3 pg:253 257
External links
European organisations for assistive technology
UK based organisations for assistive technology
including
A medical engineering design and development charity.
North American organizations for assistive technology
Category:Accessibility
Category:Assistive technology
Category:disability
Category:Educational technology
de:Hilfsmittel (Rehabilitation)
'''Accessible computing''' covers
Assistive Technology
Accessible Software
Accessible Web
Legal Issues In Accessible Computing
United States
Private Lawsuits
Section 508 Amendment to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Category:Accessibility
Category:Assistive technology
Category:Human computer interaction
An '''abacus''' is a calculation tool, often constructed as a wooden frame with beads sliding on wires. It was in use centuries before the adoption of the written Hindu Arabic numeral system and is still widely used by merchants and clerks in China and elsewhere.
The origins of the abacus are disputed, suggestions including invention in Babylonia and in China, to have taken place between 2400 BC and 300 BC. The first abacus was almost certainly based on a flat stone covered with sand or dust. Lines were drawn in the sand and pebbles used to aid calculations. From this, a variety of abaci were developed the most popular were based on the bi quinary system, using a combination of two bases (base 2 and base 5) to represent decimal numbers
The use of the word ''abacus'' dates back to before 1387 when a Middle English work borrowed the word from Latin to describe a sandboard abacus. The Latin word came from ''abakos'', the Greek genitive form of ''abax'' ("calculating table"). Because ''abax'' also had the sense of "table sprinkled with sand or dust, used for drawing geometric figures," it is speculated by some linguists that the Greek word may be derived from a Semitic root, '' b q'', the Hebrew word for "dust." Though details of the transmission are obscure, it may also be derived from the Phoenician word ''abak'', meaning "sand". The plural of abacus is abaci.
Babylonian abacus
A tablet found on the island of Salamis (near Greece) in 1846 dates back to the Babylonians of 300 BC making it the oldest counting board discovered so far. It was originally thought to be a gaming board.
Its construction is a slab of white marble measuring 149cm in length, 75cm in width and 4.5cm thick, on which are 5 groups of markings. In the center of the tablet are a set of 5 parallel lines equally divided by a vertical line, capped with a semi circle at the intersection of the bottom most horizontal line and the single vertical line. Below these lines is a wide space with a horizontal crack dividing it. Below this crack is another group of eleven parallel lines, again divided into two sections by a line perpendicular to them but with the semi circle at the top of the intersection the third, sixth and ninth of these lines are marked with a cross where they intersect with the vertical line.
Roman abacus
right Reconstruction of Roman Abacus
! This image is a 2004 photograph of the Mainz reconstruction of the
original in the Paris Library. It gives a much clearer picture that the
device is not beads on wires than the drawing used in this entry earlier.
If we are only allowed one image then this is the better to use.
mfc
The Late Empire Roman abacus shown here in reconstruction contains eight long and eight shorter grooves, the former having up to five beads in each and the latter one.
The groove marked I indicates units, X tens, and so on up to millions. The beads in the shorter grooves denote fivesfive units, five tens, ''etc.'', essentially in a bi quinary coded decimal system, obviously related to the Roman numerals. The short grooves on the right may have been used for marking Roman ounces.
Computations are made by means of beads which would probably have been slid up and down the grooves to indicate the value of each column.
Chinese abacus
The '''suanpan''' () of the Chinese is similar to the Roman abacus in principle, though has a different construction, and it was designed to do both decimal and hexadecimal arithmetics.
right Chinese abacus, the suanpan
The Chinese abacus is typically around 20 cm (8 inches) tall and it comes in various widths depending on the application. It usually has more than seven rods. There are two beads on each rod in the upper deck and five beads each in the bottom for both decimal and hexadecimal computation. The beads are usually rounded and made of a hard wood. The beads are counted by moving them up or down towards the beam. The abacus can be reset to the starting position instantly by a quick jerk along the horizontal axis to spin all the beads away from the horizontal beam at the center.
Chinese abaci can be used for functions other than counting. Unlike the simple counting board used in elementary schools, very efficient suanpan techniques have been developed to do multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, square root and cube root operations at high speed.
'''Bead arithmetic''' is the calculating technique used with various types of abaci, in particular the Chinese abacus.
Japanese abacus (Soroban)
The Japanese eliminated (first) one bead from the upper deck and (later) another bead from the lower deck in each column of the Chinese abacus. The Japanese also eliminated the use of Qiuchu (Chinese division table). The method of Chinese division table was still used when there were 5 lower beads. There came the war of the Multiplication Table versus the Division Table. The school of Multiplication table prevailed in 1920s. The rods (number of digits) increase to usually 21, 23, 27 or even 31, thus allowing calculation for more digits.
Soroban is taught in elementary schools as a part of lessons in mathematics. When teaching the soroban, a song like instruction is given by the tutor. The soroban is about 8 cm (3 inches) tall. The beads on a soroban are usually shaped as a double cone (bi cone) to facilitate ease of movement.
Often, primary students may bring along with them two sorobans, one with 1 upper bead and 5 lower beads, the other with 1 upper bead with 4 lower beads, when they learn soroban in school.
The size of beads of soroban is standardized, and they come in two types: the "Japanese" classified soroban for native Japanese, and a separate size for foreigners (since Westerners tend to be larger than most Japanese, and therefore have larger hands and fingers). The soroban that are for foreigners are made with a plastic pipe on both the left and right side of the frame, while ones made for native Japanese were all made with wooden frames. In this way the "thickness" of the soroban (for foreigners) is higher, rendering it easier for the non Japanese to manipulate.
center center
Russian abacus
The Russian abacus, the schoty or sjotty (), usually has a single slanted deck, with ten beads on each wire (except one wire which has four, and acts as a separator or for fractions). This wire is usually near the user. The Russian abacus is often used vertically, with wires from left to right in the manner of a book. The wires are usually bowed to bulge upward in the center, in order to keep the beads pinned to either of the two sides. It is cleared when all the beads are moved to the right. During manipulation, beads are moved to the left. For easy viewing, the middle 2 beads on each wire (the 5th and 6th bead) usually have a colour different to the other 8 beads. Likewise, the left bead of the thousands wire (and the million wire, if present) may have a different color.
The Russian abacus is still in common use today in shops and markets throughout the former Soviet Union, although it is no longer taught in most schools.
School abacus
Around the world, abaci have been used in pre schools and elementary schools as an aid in teaching arithmetics. In Western countries, a '''bead frame''' similar to the Russian abacus but with straight wires has been common (see image). It is still often seen as a plastic or wooden toy.
Uses by the visually impaired
Abaci are still commonly used by individuals who have visual impairments. They use an abacus to perform the mathematical functions multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, square root and cubic root. A piece of soft fabric or rubber is placed behind the beads so that they don't move inadvertently. This keeps the beads in place while the user feels or manipulates them.
Recently, abaci have been replaced to some extent by electronic calculators with speech, but only in those countries where they are easily available and affordable. However, even when they are available, many visually impaired people still prefer to use the abacus. In addition, many blind children are required to learn how to use the abacus before they are permitted the use of a talking calculator or similar device. This can be compared to sighted children being required to learn how to solve mathematical problems on paper before they are allowed the use of a calculator.
Native American abacus
Some sources mention the use of an abacus called a ''Nepohualtzintzin'' in ancient Mayan culture. This Mesoamerican abacus uses the 5 digit base 20 Mayan numeral system.
The khipu of the Inkas was a system of knotted cords used to record numerical data like advanced tally sticksbut was not used to perform calculations.
See also
Chisenbop
Slide rule
Napier's bones
History of computing
History of computing hardware
Abacus logic
Mental abacus
Positional notation
External links
General and historical articles
Tutorials
! in alphabetical order by author
Abacus curiosities
at cut the knot
Category:Ancient Rome
Category:Mathematical tools
Category:Mechanical calculators
af:Abakus
ar:
be:
ca: bac
cs:Abakus
da:Abacus (regnemaskine)
de:Abakus (Rechentafel)
el:
es: baco
eo:Abako
fa:
fr:Boulier
gl: baco
ia:Abaco
it:Abaco
he:
hu:Abakusz
nah:Nepohualtzintzin
nl:Abacus
ja:
pl:Abakus (liczyd o)
pt: baco
ru:
sl:Abak
fi:Helmitaulu
sv:Abakus
tl:Abakus
ta:
th:
tr:Abak s
zh:
An '''acid''' (often represented by the generic formula '''HA''') is a water soluble, sour tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, gives a solution with a pH of less than 7.
Definitions of acids and bases
The word "acid" comes from the Latin ''acidus'' meaning "sour", but in chemistry the term acid has a more specific meaning. There are three common ways to define an acid, namely, the '''Arrhenius''', the '''Br nsted Lowry''' and the '''Lewis''' definitions, in order of increasing generality.
'''Arrhenius''': According to this definition, an acid is a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ion (Hsub3 subOsup sup) when dissolved in water, while bases are substances that increase the concentration of hydroxide ions (OHsup sup). This definition limits acids and bases to substances that can dissolve in water. Around 1800, many French chemists, including Antoine Lavoisier, incorrectly believed that all acids contained oxygen. English chemists, including Sir Humphry Davy at the same time believed all acids contained hydrogen. The Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius used this belief to develop this definition of acid.
'''Br nsted Lowry''': According to this definition, an acid is a proton donor and a base is a proton acceptor. The acid is said to be dissociated after the proton is donated. An acid and the corresponding base are referred to conjugate acid base pairs. Br nsted and Lowry formulated this definition, which includes water insoluble substances not in the Arrhenius definition.
'''Lewis''': According to this definition, an acid as an electron pair acceptor and a base is an electron pair donor. (These are frequently referred to as "Lewis acids" and "Lewis bases," and are electrophiles and nucleophiles in organic chemistry). Lewis acids include substances with no protons, such as iron(III) chloride. The Lewis definition can also be explained with molecular orbital theory. In general, an acid can receive an electron pair in its lowest unoccupied orbital (LUMO) from the highest occupied orbital (HOMO) of a base. That is, the HOMO from the base and the LUMO from the acid combine to a bonding molecular orbital. This definition was developed by Gilbert N. Lewis.
Although not the most general theory, the Br nsted Lowry definition is the most widely used definition. The strength of an acid may be understood by this defintion by the stability of hydronium and the solvated conjugate base upon dissociation. Increasing stability of the the conjugate base will increase the acidity of a compound. This concept of acidity is used frequently for organic acids such as carboxylic acid. The molecular orbital description, where the unfilled proton orbital overlaps with a lone pair, is connected to the Lewis definition.
Solutions of weak acids and salts of their conjugate bases form buffer solutions.
Acid base systems are different from redox reactions in that there is no change in oxidation state.
Generally, acids have the following chemical and physical properties:
'''Taste''': Acids generally are sour when dissolved in water.
'''Touch''': Acids produce a stinging feeling, particularly strong acids.
'''Reactivity''': Acids react aggressively with or corrode most metals.
'''Electrical conductivity''': Acids are electrolytes.
Strong acids are dangerous, causing severe burns for even minor contact. Generally, acid burns are treated by rinsing the affected area abundantly with water and followed up with immediate medical attention.
Nomenclature
Acids are named according to the ending of their anion. That ionic ending is dropped and replaced with a new suffix according to the table below. For example, HCl has chloride as its anion, so the ide suffix makes it take the form hydrochloric acid.
border "1" cellpadding "4" align "center" cellspacing "0" style "background: f9f9f9 color: black border: 1px aaa solid border collapse: collapse "
!Anion Ending
!Acid Prefix
!Acid Suffix
per anion ate
per
ic acid
ate
ic acid
ite
ous acid
hypo anion ite
hypo
ous acid
ide
Hydro
ic acid
Chemical characteristics
In water the following equilibrium occurs between an acid (HA) and water, which acts as a base:
HA(aq) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) Asup sup(aq)
The acidity constant (or acid dissociation constant) is the equilibrium constant for the reaction of HA with water:
:mathK a mbox H 3 mbox O cdot A over HA math
Strong acids have large ''K''suba sub values (i.e. the reaction equilibrium lies far to the right the acid is almost completely dissociated to Hsub3 subOsup sup and Asup sup). Strong acids include the heavier hydrohalic acids: hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydrobromic acid (HBr), and hydroiodic acid (HI). (However, hydrofluoric acid, HF, is relatively weak.) For example, the ''K''suba sub value for hydrochloric acid (HCl) is 10sup7 sup.
Weak acids have small ''K''suba sub values (i.e. at equilibrium significant amounts of HA and Asup sup exist together in solution modest levels of Hsub3 subOsup sup are present the acid is only partially dissociated). For example, the Ksuba sub value for acetic acid is 1.8 x 10sup 5 sup. Most organic acids are weak acids. Oxoacids, which tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen may be quite strong or weak. Nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and perchloric acid are all strong acids, whereas nitrous acid, sulfurous acid and hypochlorous acid are all weak.
Note the following:
The terms "hydrogen ion" and "proton" are used interchangebly both refer to Hsup sup.
In aqueous solution, the water is protonated to form hydronium ion, Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq). This is often abbreviated as Hsup sup(aq) even though the symbol is not chemically correct.
The strength of an acid is measured by its acid dissociation constant (''K''suba sub) or equivalently its p''K''suba sub (p''K''suba sub log(''K''suba sub).
The pH of a solution is a measurement of the concentration of hydronium. This will depend of the concnetration and nature of acids and bases in solution.
Polyprotic acids
Polyprotic acids are able to donate more than one proton per acid molecule, in contrast to monoprotic acids that only donate one proton per molecule. Specific types of polyprotic acids have more specific names, such as '''diprotic acid''' (two potenital protons to donate) and '''triprotic acid''' (three potenital protons to donate)
A monoprotic acid can undergo one dissociation (sometimes called ionization) as follows and simply has one acid dissociation constant as shown above:
:::::HA(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) Asup sup(aq) ''K''suba sub
A diprotic acid (here symbolized by Hsub2 subA) can undergo one or two dissociations depending on the pH. Each dissociation has its own dissociation constant, Ksuba1 sub and Ksuba2 sub.
:::::Hsub2 subA(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) HAsup sup(aq) ''K''suba1 sub
:::::HAsup sup(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) Asup2 sup(aq) ''K''suba2 sub
The first dissociation constant is typically greater than the second i.e., ''K''suba1 sub ''K''suba2 sub . For example, sulfuric acid (Hsub2 subSOsub4 sub) can donate one proton to form the bisulfate anion (HSOsub4 subsup sup), for which ''K''suba1 sub is very large then it can donate a second proton to form the sulfate anion (SOsub4 subsup2 sup), wherein the ''K''suba2 sub is intermediate strength. The large ''K''suba1 sub for the first dissociation makes sulfuric a strong acid. In a similar manner, the weak unstable carbonic acid (Hsub2 subCOsub3 sub) can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion (HCOsub3 subsup sup) and lose a second to form carbonate anion (COsub3 subsup2 sup). Both ''K''suba sub values are small, but ''K''suba1 sub ''K''suba2 sub .
A triprotic acid (Hsub3 subA) can undergo one, two, or three dissociations and has three dissociation constants, where ''K''suba1 sub ''K''suba2 sub ''K''suba3 sub .
:::::Hsub3 subA(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) Hsub2 subAsup sup(aq) ''K''suba1 sub
:::::Hsub2 subAsup sup(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) HAsup2 sup(aq) ''K''suba2 sub
:::::HAsup2 sup(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) Hsub3 subOsup sup(aq) Asup3 sup(aq) ''K''suba3 sub
An inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid (Hsub3 subPOsub4 sub), usually just called phosphoric acid. All three protons can be successively lost to yield Hsub2 subPOsub4 subsup sup, then HPOsub4 subsup2 sup, and finally POsub4 subsup3 sup , the orthophosphate ion, usually just called phosphate. An organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid, which can successively lose three protons to finally form the citrate ion. Even though the positions of the protons on the original molecule may be equivalent, the successive ''K''suba sub values will differ since it is energetically less favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is more negatively charged.
Neutralization
Neutralization is the reaction between equal amounts of an acid and a base, producing a salt and water for example, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide form sodium chloride and water:
::HCl(aq) NaOH(aq) Hsub2 subO(l) NaCl(aq)
Neutralization is the basis of titration, where a pH indicator shows equivalence point when the equivalent number of moles of a base have been added to an acid.
Common acids
Strong inorganic acids
Hydrobromic acid
Hydrochloric acid
Hydroiodic acid
Nitric acid
Sulfuric acid
Perchloric acid
Medium to weak inorganic acids
Boric acid
Carbonic acid
Chloric acid
Hydrofluoric acid
Phosphoric acid
Pyrophosphoric acid
Weak organic acids
Acetic acid
Benzoic acid
Butyric acid
Citric acid
Formic acid
Lactic acid
Malic acid
Mandelic acid
Methanethiol
Propionic acid
Pyruvic acid
Valeric acid
Acids in food
'''Acetic acid''': (E260) found in vinegar
'''Adipic acid''': (E355)
'''Alginic acid''': (E400)
'''Ascorbic acid''' (vitamin C): (E300) found in fruits
'''Benzoic acid''': (E210)
'''Boric acid''': (E284)
'''Citric acid''': (E330) found in citrus fruits
'''Carbonic acid''': (E290) found in carbonated soft drinks
'''Carminic acid''': (E120)
'''Cyclamic acid''': (E952)
'''Erythorbic acid''': (E315)
'''Erythorbin acid''': (E317)
'''Formic acid''': (E236)found in bee and ant stings
'''Fumaric acid''': (E297)
'''Gluconic acid''': (E574)
'''Glutamic acid''': (E620)
'''Guanylic acid''': (E626)
'''Hydrochloric acid''': (E507)
'''Inosinic acid''': (E630)
'''Lactic acid''': (E270) found in dairy products such as yoghurt and sour milk, also is product of cellular fermentation, the reason muscles burn
'''Malic acid''': (E296)
'''Metatartaric acid''': (E353)
'''Methanethiol''': found in cheese and some other fermented foods.
'''Niacin''' (nicotinic acid): (E375)
'''Oxalic acid''': found in spinach and rhubarb
'''Pectic acid''': found in fruits and some vegetables
'''Phosphoric acid''': (E338)
'''Propionic acid''': (E280)
'''Sorbic acid''': (E200) found in foods and drinks
'''Stearic acid''': (E570), a type of fatty acid.
'''Succinic acid''': (E363)
'''Sulfuric acid''': (E513)
'''Tannic acid''': found in tea
'''Tartaric acid''': (E334) found in grapes
Sources
Zumdahl, Chemistry, 4th Edition.
See also
acid number
Category:Chemical substances
Category:Arabic words
! interwiki
bg:
ca: cid
cs:Kyselina
da:Syre
de:S uren
et:Hape
es: cido
eo:Acido
fr:Acide
gl: cido
ko: ( )
hr:Kiseline
io:Acido
id:Asam
it:Acido
he:
lv:Sk be
lt:R g tis
hu:Sav
mk:
nl:Zuur (chemie)
nds:S r
ja:
pl:Kwas
pt: cido
ro:Acid
ru:
simple:Acid
sk:Kyselina
sl:Kislina
sr:
sv:Syra
tl:Asido
ta:
th:
vi:Ax t
uk:
zh:
''The term '''asphalt''' is often used as an abbreviation for asphalt concrete.''
'''Asphalt''' is a sticky, black and highly viscous liquid or semi solid that is present in most crude petroleums and in some natural deposits. Asphalt is composed almost entirely of bitumen. There is some disagreement amongst chemists regarding the structure of asphalt, however it is most commonly modeled as a colloid, with ''asphaltenes'' as the dispersed phase and ''maltenes'' as the continuous phase.
Asphalt is sometimes confused with tar, which is an artificial material produced by the destructive distillation of organic matter. Tar is also predominantly composed of bitumen, however the bitumen content of tar is typically lower than that of asphalt. Tar and asphalt have very different engineering properties.
Asphalt can be separated from the other components in crude oil (such as naphtha, gasoline and diesel) by the process of fractional distillation, usually under vacuum conditions. A better separation can be achieved by further processing of the heavier fractions of the crude oil in a de asphalting unit which uses either propane or butane in a supercritical phase to dissolve the lighter molecules which are then separated. Further processing is possible by "blowing" the product: namely reacting it with oxygen. This makes the product harder and more viscous.
Natural deposits of asphalt include Lake Asphalts (primarily from the Pitch Lake in Trinidad and Tobago and Bermudez Lake in Venezuela), Gilsonite, the Dead Sea in Israel, and Tar Sands.
Asphalt is rather hard to transport in bulk (it hardens unless kept very hot) so it is sometimes mixed with diesel oil or kerosene before shipping. Upon delivery, these lighter materials are separated out of the mixture. This mixture is often called '''bitumen feedstock''', or BFS.
The largest use of asphalt is for making asphalt concrete for pavements, which accounts for approximately 80 of the asphalt consumed in the United States. Roofing shingles account for most of the remaining asphalt consumption. Other uses include cattle sprays, fence post treatments, and waterproofing for fabrics.
In the ancient middle east natural asphalt deposits were used for mortar between bricks and stones, ship caulk, and waterproofing. The Persian word for asphalt is ''mumiya'', which may be the source for the English word mummy.
References
Barth, Edwin J., ''Asphalt: Science and Technology'' Gordon and Breach (1962). ISBN 0677000405.
External links
Category:Petroleum products
Category:Construction
Category:Pavements
de:Asphalt
es:Asfalto
fr:Asphalte
id:Aspal
he:
nl:Asfalt
ja:
pl:Asfalt
pt:Asfalto
ru:
sv:Asfalt
fi:Asvaltti
vi:Nh a ng
The '''American National Standards Institute''' (ANSI) is a nonprofit organization that oversees the development of standards for products, services, processes and systems in the United States. The organization also coordinates U.S. standards with international standards so that American products can be used worldwide. For example, standards make sure that people who own cameras can find the film they need for them anywhere around the globe.
The American National Standards Institute approves standards that are developed by representatives of standards developing organizations, government agencies, consumer groups, companies, and others. These standards make sure that the characteristics and performance of products are consistent, that people use the same definitions and terms, and that products are tested the same way.
ANSI accredits organizations that carry out product or personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined in international standards. The ANSI accreditation programs conform to international guidelines as verified by government and peer review assessments.
In 1918, five engineering societies and three government agencies founded the American Engineering Standards Committee (AESC). The AESC became the American Standards Association (ASA) in 1928. In 1966, the ASA was reorganized and became the United States of America Standards Institute (USASI). The present name was adopted in 1969. The organization's headquarters are in Washington, D.C. For more information see its Web site at http: www.ansi.org.
The '''ASA''' photographic exposure system became the basis for the ISO film speed system, currently used worldwide.
In Microsoft Windows, the phrase "ANSI" refers to the Windows ANSI code pages. Most of these are fixed width though there are some variable width ones for ideographic languages. Some of these are very close to the ISO 8859 series leading many to falsely assume that they are identical.
ASCII art which is colorized or animated by way of ANSI terminal control codes (X3.64 sequences) are commonly referred to as "ANSI art" and were predominantly popular on bulletin board systems throughout the 1980s and 1990s.
See also
ANSI art, art created from a subset of X3.64
ANSI.SYS, a device driver for MS DOS
ANSI escape codes
Unified Thread Standard
External links
official website
Category:Standards organizations
ar:ANSI
zh min nan:ANSI
cs:American National Standards Institute
de:American National Standards Institute
es:ANSI
fr:American National Standards Institute
ko:ANSI
it:ANSI
he:
hu:ANSI
nl:American National Standards Institute
ja:ANSI
no:American National Standards Institute
pl:ANSI
pt:American National Standards Institute
sl:ANSI
sv:ANSI
th:
vi:ANSI
tr:ANSI
zh:
Infobox City
official name Anchorage, Alaska
nickname The City of Lights and Flowers
image skyline Downtownanchorage,Alaska.jpg
image flag Us ak an.jpg
image seal
image map Map of Alaska highlighting Anchorage Municipality.png
map caption Location in the state of Alaska
subdivision type Borough
subdivision name Municipality of Anchorage
leader title Mayor
leader name Mark Begich
area magnitude 1 E9
area total 1,961.1 mi 5,079.2
area land 1,697.2 mi 4,395.8
area water 2.63.9 mi 683.4
population as of 2004
population metro 339,286
population total 272,687
population density 160.7
timezone AST
utc offset 9
timezone DST ADT
utc offset DST 8
latd 61
latm 13
lats 06
latNS N
longd 149
longm 53
longs 57
longEW W
elevation 115
website
footnotes
'''Anchorage''' is a Unified Home Rule Municipality (officially called the '''Municipality of Anchorage''') in the U.S. state of Alaska. It is also a census area. With 260,283 residents according to the 2000 census, Anchorage is the largest city in the state of Alaska, composing more than two fifths of the state's population. A State of Alaska Demographer in 2004 estimates the population at 277,498. Anchorage was founded in 1915 and named after a place where a ship lies at anchor. Its official nickname is "The City of Lights and Flowers". Garden writers call Anchorage the "Hanging Basket Capital of the World" when it comes to the city's 100,000 hanging baskets, and aviation buffs refer to the city as the "Air Crossroads of the World" because of its geographical location between the two northern continents.
In downtown Anchorage along the streets and sidewalks are 425 baskets of bright gold triploid marigold drenched with trailing sapphire lobelia. The blue and gold flowers represent the colors of the Municipality of Anchorage flag and the Alaska state flag. The city of Anchorage blooms with vibrant color during the late spring and summer when it comes to flowers.
Today Anchorage has many features of a modern urban area, such as parks and forests, bike and city trails, skiing and cross country ski trails, business and commerce, theaters and other entertainments. The tourist industry is strong and offers many activities and attractions.
History
Russia was well established in North America by the 1800s. In 1867, U.S. Secretary of State William H. Seward brokered a deal to purchase Alaska from debt ridden Russia for 7.2 million, about two cents an acre. Alaska's value was not appreciated by the American masses at that time, calling it "'''Seward's folly'''", "'''Seward's icebox'''" and "'''Walrussia'''". By 1888, gold was discovered along Turnagain Arm. In 1912, Alaska became a United States Territory. Anchorage was carefully laid out by city planners in 1914, originally as a railroad construction port for the Alaska Railroad, and on July 9, 1915, the first sale of town lots was held. In 1915 President Woodrow Wilson authorized funds for the construction of the Alaska Railroad. That same year the Anchorage Chamber of Commerce was formed. Ship Creek Landing in Anchorage was selected as the headquarters of this effort. Soon a "Tent City" sprang up at the mouth of Ship Creek and the population quickly swelled to more than 2,000. Would be entrepreneurs flocked to this bustling frontier town, and they brought with them everything necessary to build a city. A popular hardware and clothing store, "The Anchorage," was actually an old dry docked steamship named "Berth." Although the area had been known by various names, the U.S. Post Office Department formalized the use of the name "Anchorage," and despite some protests the name stuck. In 1920, the United States government relinquished its direct control over the city, and elections were held. Anchorage was incorporated on November 23, 1920. In 1923, William Mulcahy establishes the Anchorage Baseball League. Mulcahy was a baseball fan who was working as the Alaska Railroad station auditor assistant and established the baseball league in his spare time. Later in life, Mulcahy introduced Little League baseball and established the city's YMCA. The Mulcahy Park stadium and ball field were named in his honor for his contributions to early Anchorage.
The 1930s were a time that Anchorage rebounded from the loss of population and industry it had suffered during World War I. Air transportation became increasingly important to Anchorage.
In 1930, the original "Park Strip" landing field was replaced by a new facility, Merrill Field, which had a beacon and a control tower, and in a few short years, it became one of the busiest centers of civilian aircraft activity in the United States. In 1937, Providence Alaska Medical Center opened its doors.
! Unsourced image removed:
The arrival of US Army troops in 1940 marked a decade of growth based on military expansion for Anchorage. Growth spurted in the 1940s, with the construction of Elmendorf Air Force Base and Fort Richardson, which made Anchorage a major defense center. In 1940, a canal was built connecting Lake Spenard with Lake Hood, making it the world's largest seaplane base. The outbreak of World War II with the threat of a Japanese invasion prompted continued expansion of military personnel and aircraft, and later the pressures of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union ensured continued heavy military investment in the Anchorage area. In 1947, the parking meter was introduced in Anchorage, and in 1949, the first traffic lights were installed on Fourth Avenue. Between 1939 and 1950, Anchorage's population spurted from 4,230 to 30,060, and the cost of living soared. Anchorage also experienced an unfortunate rise in crime during this tumultuous growth period, a problem the city would fight for decades.
The decade of the 1950s was also eventful. In 1951 came the opening of the Seward Highway. On December 10, 1951, Anchorage established itself as the "Air Crossroads of the World" when Anchorage International Airport opened with transpolar airline traffic flying between Western Europe and East Asia. The new airport also became a refueling stop for flights between the contiguous 48 states and East Asia, until nonstop flights became practical around 1970, with the Boeing 747 airliner. In 1953, health care expanded with the opening of the Alaska Native Medical Center. Also, three volcanoes erupted in the area, including Mount Spurr, which dumped several inches of ash on Anchorage. KTVA, the city's first television station, began broadcasting in 1953. In 1954, the Alyeska Resort was established. In 1957, oil was discovered on the Kenai Peninsula. On January 3, 1959, Alaska joined the union as the 49th state.
! Unsourced image removed:
The decade of the 1960s began on a bright note for Anchorage after Alaska's attaining statehood. After Alaska became a state, Anchorage faced a severe housing shortage, which was solved partially by suburban expansion. In January 1964, Anchorage became both a City and a Borough. But on March 27, 1964, Anchorage was hit by the Good Friday Earthquake, which registered 9.2 on the Richter scale and caused tremendous destruction in south Alaska. This earthquake was the strongest ever recorded in North America and United States history, and Anchorage lay only 75 miles (120 km) from the epicenter. It killed 131 people across South Central Alaska, and property damage was estimated at over 300 million (1964 dollars). The brand new J.C. Penney department store in Anchorage was flattened. Anchorage's remarkable recovery from this disaster dominated life in the late 1960s. The continued threat of earthquakes has prompted a limit on the height of buildings in the city the tallest buildings are 21 stories high. In 1968, Kincaid Park was created in South Anchorage from a former Nike surface to air missile site. That same year, oil was discovered in Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic Slope and, in 1969, oil lease sales brought billions of dollars to the state.
, the lead sled dog during the last part of the Iditarod serum run.
The decade of the 1970s was an important time of growth for the Anchorage economy. On March 3, 1973, the first 1049 mile long (1690 km) Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race started from downtown Anchorage with 34 mushers. Twenty two mushers finished the race, with the last one arriving in Nome one month after he left the starting line. In recent years, winners have finished the race in less than 10 days. In 1974, construction begain on the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, with Valdez, not Anchorage, as its southern terminus. The oil discovery and pipline construction fueled a modern day boom when oil and construction companies set up their headquarters in Anchorage. The pipeline was completed in 1977 at a cost of more than 8 billion. In 1975, Bicentennial Park was created in Southeast Anchorage. On September 15, 1975, the city and borough consolidated forming a unified government. Also included in this unification were Eagle River, Eklutna, Girdwood, Glen Alps, and several other communities. The unified area became officially known as the Municipality of Anchorage. By 1980, the population of Anchorage had grown to 174,431.
The decade of the 1980s was a time of growth, thanks to a flood of North Slope oil revenue into the state treasury. Capital projects and an aggressive beautification program, combined with far sighted community planning, greatly increased infrastructure and quality of life. These included a new library, civic center, sports arena, and performing arts center. The 1980s was also a time when Alaska's up and down economy struck. The price of oil dropped dramatically, and recession hit Anchorage. But in 1984, Hilltop Ski Area was established, which along with the Alyeska Resort in Girdwood, and Alpenglow at Arctic Valley gave residents three fully operational skiing areas, benefitting tourism and recreational activities. In 1986, Kincaid Outdoor Center opens. In 1989, Mount Redoubt erupted again, curtailing aviation in the Anchorage area for a short period of time.
The decade of the 1990s was a time when Anchorage saw gold. In 1996, the Arctic Winter Games were held in Chugiak Eagle River and, in 1999, the Alaska Native Heritage Center opened.
On July 8, 2000, the municipal airport was renamed "Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport" in honor of Alaska's longest serving United States Senator.
! Unsourced image removed: (Denali) in background.
In spite of the height limitations on buildings, Anchorage today has an attractive skyline nevertheless, particularly with the Chugach Mountains, Cook Inlet, or the often visible Mount McKinley (also known as Denali) as a backdrop. From Government Hill, one can see the best view of Mount McKinley. Though space is limited in the "Anchorage bowl," as locals call the peninsula on which the city is located, many parks, greenbelts, and other undeveloped areas can be found within the city itself, making it particularly attractive to nature lovers (to say nothing of the attractions available just a short distance outside the city). Over the past thirty years, however, many of these undeveloped areas have filled in with houses, strip malls, and other development. Nonetheless, there is an enormous amount of land under the Anchorage Municipal control, which totals some 1,955 square miles (5063 km sup2) about the size of Delaware. The majority of this land is located within the Chugach Mountains to the east of the city, which also comprises Chugach State Park.
Geography and climate
Geography
According to the United States Census Bureau, the municipality has a total area of 5,079.2 km (1,961.1 mi), 4,395.8 km (1,697.2 mi) of it is land and 683.4 km (263.9 mi) of it is water. The total area is 13.46 water.
Anchorage is located in South Central Alaska, at 61 13'06"North latitude (about the same as Stockholm and St. Petersburg), 149 53'57"West longitude (about the same as Hawaii), northeast of the Alaska Peninsula, Kodiak Island, and Cook Inlet, due north of the Kenai Peninsula, northwest of Prince William Sound and Alaska Panhandle, and nearly due south of Mount McKinley Denali. The city is situated on a triangular peninsula bordered on the east by the rugged, scenic, and eminently hike worthy Chugach Mountains, on the northwest by the Knik Arm, and on the southwest by the Turnagain Arm, upper branches of the Cook Inlet, which itself is the northernmost reach of the Pacific Ocean. Despite this, the city lacks coastal beaches, instead having wide, treacherous mudflats. Adjacent to the north is Matanuska Susitna Borough, Alaska. To the south is Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska, and to the east is Valdez Cordova Census Area, Alaska.
Climate
Average daytime summer temperatures are approximately 55 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit (13 to 27 degrees Celsius) average daytime winter temperatures are about 5 to 20 degrees ( 15 to 7 degrees Celsius) (warmer than many places in the contiguous United States). Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport (PANC) average January low and high temperatures are 9 F 22 F ( 13 C 5 C) with an average winter snowfall of 70.60 inches (179.3 cm). The weather on any given day and indeed for entire seasons can be very unpredictable. Some winters feature several feet of snow and bitterly cold temperatures, while others, just a foot or two of snow and frequent thaws, which puts dangerous ice on the streets. On March 17, 2002, a record 24 hour (St. Patrick's Day) snow storm dumped 25.7 inches (65.3 cm) of snow on the Anchorage area, causing the airport and schools to close on that day, and several days longer for the schools. The 1954 1955 winter had 132.8 inches (337.3 cm), which made it the snowiest winter on record. The coldest temperature ever recorded at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport was 38 F ( 38.8 C) on February 3, 1948. Summers are typically very mild and pleasant, though it can rain frequently. There isn't any beach bathing in Anchorage, except at a few local lakes on the warmest summer days, when those lakeside beaches can be extremely popular. Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport average July low and high temperatures are 52 F 66 F (11 C 19 C) and the hottest reading ever recorded was 86 F (30 C) on June 25, 1953. The average annual precipitation at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport is 16.07 inches (40.8 cm). Aside from the winter cold, which most Alaskans don't mind, there are two primary nuisances associated with the seasons: in the summer, mosquitoes (which are much worse out in the Bush than in the city itself) in the winter, long nights and very short days. Since Anchorage is at such a high latitude, for months in mid winter, residents go to work in the dark and return home in the dark. Those who don't study or work next to a window can go all week long without seeing the sun.
Demographics
class "wikitable" style "float:right margin left:3px text size:80 text align:right"
align center colspan 2 '''City of Anchorage brPopulation by year '''
1950 30,060
1960 82,833
1970 126,385
1980 174,431
1990 226,338
2000 260,283
As of the U.S. Census of 2000, Anchorage had a population of 260,283 and in all the Municipality of Anchorage is home to almost two fifths of Alaska's population. The population density is 59.2 km (153.4 mi). There are 100,368 housing units at an average density of 22.8 km (59.1 mi). The racial makeup of the municipality is 72.23 White (Caucasian), 5.55 are Asian Americans, 5.84 are African Americans, 7.28 are American Indians or Alaska Natives, 0.93 are Pacific Islanders, 5.69 are Hispanic Americans or Latinos of any race, 5.98 are from two or more races, and 2.19 are from other non white backgrounds.
There are 94,822 households out of which 38.9 have children under the age 18 living with them, 51.1 are married couples living together, 11.5 have a female householder with no husband present, and 32.4 are non families. 23.4 of all households are made up of individuals and 3.8 have someone living alone who is 65 years of age or older. The average household size is 2.67 and the average family size is 3.19.
In the city the population is spread out with 29.1 under the age of 18, 9.6 from 18 to 24, 33.9 from 25 to 44, 21.9 from 45 to 64, and 5.5 who are 65 years of age or older. The median age is 32 years. For every 100 females there are 101.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there are 102.4 males.
The median income for a household in the city is 55,546, and the median income for a family is 63,682. Males have a median income of 41,267 versus 63,682 for females. The per capita income for the city is 25,287. 7.3 of the population and 5.1 of families are below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 8.8 of those under the age of 18 and 6.4 of those 65 and older are living below the poverty line.
Anchoragites exemplify many of the qualities to be found among Alaskans generally: independence, friendliness, practical mindedness, and a love of the outdoors. There is, even among businesspeople in Anchorage, a tendency to "dress down". (There is no dress code in any Anchorage restaurant.) This, and a sort of frontier spirit that still lives on in Alaska generally, gives Anchorage a relatively casual, relaxed atmosphere compared to some other American cities. (These cultural characteristics are only more exaggerated the farther one moves out of the city into the rest of Alaska.) The city has traditionally served as a destination for immigrants, and there are active Asian, Eastern European, and Hispanic populations, along with communities of African Americans and various groups of aboriginal Alaskans. Over 95 languages are spoken by students in the Anchorage School District.
Government
Anchorage is administered by an elected mayor and assembly, and a city manager. The city's current mayor is Mark Begich.
Sister cities
Anchorage is internationally partnered with a number of sister cities to promote global cooperation, cultural exchange and economic collaboration.
Today, Anchorage has six sister cities, including Chitose, (Japan) Darwin, (Australia) Incheon, (South Korea) Magadan, (Russia) Tromso, (Norway) and Whitby, (England).
Economy
Anchorage is the center of commerce for Alaska and a major port, receiving over 95 of all freight entering Alaska passes, as well as a major hub of the famous Alaska Railroad. Several oil and gas industries like: BP Exploration (Alaska , Inc. ConocoPhillips Alaska, Inc. Doyon Universal Services Enstar Natural Gas Co. ExxonMobil Production Flint Hills Resources Norcoast Mechanical Tesoro Alaska Petroleum Co. Udelhoven Oilfield System Services, Inc. Union Oil Company of California and VECO Alaska, Inc. are all headquartered in Anchorage.
Anchorage is home to two major corporations which provide communication services to Alaska: Alaska Communications Systems and General Communications, Inc., both of which offer local and long distance telephone service, dial up and broadband Internet access, and cellular telephone service.
Many corporations, such as large banks, real estate, transportation, other communications, and government agencies are all headquartered in Anchorage. There are two strategically important U.S. military bases bordering Anchorage on the north: Elmendorf AFB and Fort Richardson. Both military bases together station over 9,000 military personnels.
Numerous visitor and tourist facilities and services are available throughout the Municipality of Anchorage. Nearly all Alaska Interior bound tourists pass through Anchorage at some stage of their journeys in Alaska. This is particulatly true since the Alaska Railroad has its southern terminus in Anchorage. Not surprisingly, the summer is tourist season, and downtown Anchorage, as well as the highways and railroads leading north and south of the city, are typically teeming with tourists. Anchorage has seasonal factors contribute to a fluctuating, though low, unemployment rate.
Education
Education in Anchorage, Eagle River, Chugiak, Eklutna, Girdwood, Fort Richardson, and Elmendorf AFB is managed by the Anchorage School District.
Anchorage has an excellent public school system that is ranked among the finest in the nation. The Anchorage School District is the 81st largest district in the United States, with nearly 50,000 students attending 88 schools.
The district's average SAT and ACT College entrance exam scores are consistently above the national average and Advanced Placement courses are offered at each of the district's high schools. The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme is also offered at West High, one of the local high schools. The average teacher student ratio in the district's elementary schools is one teacher to approximately every 25 students.
The district offers a comprehensive curriculum that emphasizes the basic communication skills of reading, writing, and arithmetic. The standard program also includes social studies, health, science, and physical education. All students receive a quality education enriched with technology, foreign language, visual and performing arts, and social sciences.
A variety of programs and alternative learning environments meet the needs of the diverse student population. Some examples include ABC (back to basics curriculum) and Montessori schools, open optional programs, foreign language immersion, vocational technical training and charter schools. Comprehensive services for bilingual students and students with special needs are also available.
Colleges and universities
Ninety percent of Anchorage's adults have high school diplomas, 65 percent have attended one to three years of college, and 17 percent hold advanced degrees, placing Anchorage among the top metropolitan cities in educational attainment.
Anchorage boasts four excellent higher education facilities that offer quality higher education. The University of Alaska Anchorage and Alaska Pacific University are within walking distance of each other, and Charter College and Wayland Baptist University are also located in city limits.
Culture
Performing arts
! Unsourced image removed:
Despite the relative remoteness of the location, the city sports a lively arts community. Located next to Town Square Municipal Park in downtown Anchorage, the Alaska Center for the Performing Arts is a three part complex host to many performing arts events. The facility can accommodate more than 3,000 patrons. In 2000, nearly 245,000 people visited 678 public performances. It is home to eight resident performing arts companies and has featured mega musicals such as CATS, Grease, Les Miserables, Phantom of the Opera and Big River. The center hosts the Anchorage Symphony Orchestra which is a semi professional symphony orchestra. The center also hosts the world famous International Ice Carving Competition as part of the Fur Rendezvous festival in February. There are also weekly sessions of Irish traditional music, Jazz, and other musical scenes.
The Anchorage Concert Association brings 15 to 20 world class performing arts events to the community each winter, and numerous independent perforance groups.
Museums and art collections
The Alaska Aviation Heritage Museum is a museum with artifacts reflecting Alaska's unique aviation history. The Alaska State Troopers Museum was formed in the late 1960s, and shares the history of the Alaska State Troopers. The Anchorage Fire Department Museum is a museum that relive Anchorage history among the displays of fire fighting memorabilia, including a vintage 1921 LaFrance fire truck. The Imaginarium is a hands on Science Discovery Center. The Oscar Anderson House Museum is Anchorage's only house museum established in 1915. The Russian Orthodox Museum was incorporated in 1988, is a world class observation facility. The Alaska Museum of Natural History is a non profit museum that educates exclusively on Alaska's unique geological, cultural, and ecological history.
History art collections are at the Anchorage Museum of History and Art, opened in 1968, is a world class museum. The Heritage Library Museum was established in 1968, and is viewed as one of the largest collections of Alaska artifacts.
Other cultural institutions
! Unsourced image removed:
The Alaska Zoo, opened as a children's zoo in 1969, is home to just under 100 birds and mammals. The Alaska Wildlife Conservation Center, opened to the public in 1993, is a refuge for the orphaned, injured wildlife, a non profit organization. The Alaska Native Heritage Center, opened in 1999, is a gathering place that celebrates, perpetuates and shares Alaska Native cultures. The Alaska Botanical Garden contains over 900 species of hardy perennials and 150 native plant species.
Local attractions
The H2Oasis Indoor Waterpark, opened in 2003, is literally and figuratively the hottest spot in Alaska for fun and adventure. Alpenglow at Arctic Valley is a ski resort that is located on Ski Bowl Road in the Chugach State Park near Fort Richardson. The Alyeska Resort is a ski resort that is located in Girdwood. The Hilltop Ski Area is located on the gentle slopes of southeast Anchorage that weave against the base of Chugach State Park. The Nordic Skiing Association of Anchorage is a non profit organization dedicated to promoting all forms of nordic skiing.
Media
Anchorage's leading newspapers are the Anchorage Daily News , the Insurgent49 and the Petroleum News .
Anchorage is also well served by television and radio. Anchorage's major network television affiliates are KIMO 13(ABC), KTVA 11(CBS), KAKM 7(PBS), KTBY 4(FOX), KTUU TV 2(NBC), KYES 5(UPN) and KDMD 33(PAX Shopping). ARCS: The Alaska Rural Communications Service, which provides some original programming and also "cherry picks" retransmissions from among the broadcast stations in Anchorage, though usually not KIMO except in very rare occasions (such as Iditarod coverage), to provide television service to remote areas.
Leading radio stations include AM Stations KTZN 550 Clear Channel Communications, KHAR 590, KENI 650 Clear Channel Communications, KBYR 700, KFQD 750 and KUDO 1080. FM Stations KRUA 88.1 University of Alaska, Anchorage, KAKL 88.5 "Positive, Encouraging K Love", Christian Music, K Love, EMF Broadcasting, KATB 89.3, KNBA 90.3, KSKA 91.1, KFAT 92.9 New Northwest Broadcasters, KAFC 93.7, KEAG 97.3, KLEF 98.1, KYMG 98.9 Clear Channel Communications, KBFX 100.5 Clear Channel Communications, KGOT 101.3 Clear Channel Communications, KDBZ 102.1 New Northwest Broadcasters, KMXS 103.1, KBRJ 104.1, KNIK 105.7, KWHL 106.5 and KASH 107.5 Clear Channel Communications.
Sports
class "wikitable"
! Club
! Sport
! League
! Stadium
! Logo
Alaska Aces
Ice Hockey
ECHL
Sullivan Arena
Anchorage Bucs Baseball Club
Baseball
Alaska Baseball League
Mulcahy Stadium
Anchorage Glacier Pilots
Baseball
Alaska Baseball League
Mulcahy Stadium
Great Alaska Shootout
Basketball
N A
Sullivan Arena
Anchorage is home to the Alaska Aces of the ECHL hockey league. The Anchorage Bucs Baseball Club is a summer collegiate baseball team, attracting players from universities throughout the world. The Anchorage Glacier Pilots is a member of the National Baseball Congress. Anchorage is also home to the Great Alaska Shootout, an annual college basketball tournament that features colleges from all over the U.S.
The best ski jumper from the U.S. in the past 15 years is from Anchorage, Alan Alborn. He has finished 4th in a stage of the World Cup in Engelberg, Switzerland, and has a 11th place from the 2002 Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah. He also holds the US skiflying record with 221,5 meters from 2002 in Planica, Slovenia.
Infrastructure
Transportation
! Unsourced image removed:
Anchorage is usually the starting or ending point of most visitors' Alaska vacations, and it serves as the airline hub for the state, being serviced by Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport. Anchorage is served by some national airlines, primarily Seattle based Alaska Airlines, as well as a number of international airlines. The Alaska Railroad offers daily summer service to Seward, Talkeetna, Denali National Park, and Fairbanks. These communities are also served by inter city bus line from Anchorage. Transportation to downtown Anchorage is convenient by taxicab, airport shuttle, or hotel courtesy shuttles. Upon arrival, visitors can stop by the Anchorage Convention Visitors Bureau Visitor Information Center or the Alaska Visitors Center for direction. Diamond Airport Parking offers long term parking with free 24 hour shuttle service to the airport. Cruise passengers with a few hours or a full day to explore Anchorage can store their luggage (and fish) at the airport. The Ship Creek Shuttle connects key downtown Anchorage locations with the Ship Creek area, including stops at the Alaska Railroad Depot.
! Unsourced image removed: .
Anchorage also has a bus system called People Mover , with a central hub in downtown Anchorage and satellite hubs at Dimond Center and Muldoon Mall. People Mover also provides point to point van services to seniors and those with disabilities, as well as car pool organization services.
There is only one officially designated Interstate Highway in Alaska. Unlike the Interstate routes in Hawaii, it is unsigned as such. The route, officially Interstate A 1 runs along the Seward and Glenn Highways. The highway is numbered Alaska State Highway 1. About 10 miles of the Seward Highway, (known as the New Seward Highway) is built to freeway standards. The Glenn Highway, also built to freeway standards goes northeast from Anchorage, six lanes carrying commuter traffic to and from Eagle River, Chugiak, and the Matanuska Valley towns of Palmer and Wasilla. The highway is four lanes wide from Eagle River to the junction with the Parks Highway (Alaska State Highway 3) near Wasilla. Anchorage's roads and the state's highways are all asphalt. They are plowed when necessary in the winter. Highway construction and maintenance is limited to the warm months, so expect some delays.
As of 2005, Anchorage has a long range transportation plan. Building the Highway to Highway Connection as a limited access highway link between the Glenn and Seward highways could be the backbone that efficiently delivers traffic to many destinations throughout the city.
Today, traffic is heavy all day long 5th 6th Avenues, Ingra and Gambell, and spills into East Anchorage neighborhoods to avoid congestion. In the Fairview, Mountain View, and Midtown neighborhoods, the new road link would be dug down, out of sight and covered in some areas to allow easy pedestrian and vehicle access across.
Medical centers and hospitals
Providence Alaska Medical Center on Providence Drive in Anchorage is the largest hospital in Alaska and is part of Providence Health System in Alaska, Washington, Oregon and California. It features the state's most comprehensive range of services. Providence Health System has a history of serving Alaska, beginning when the Sisters of Providence first brought health care to Nome in 1902. As the territory grew during the following decades, so did efforts to provide care. Their hospitals were opened in Fairbanks in 1910 and Anchorage in 1937.
Alaska Regional Hospital on DeBarr Road in Anchorage was born in 1963 as Anchorage Presbyterian Hospital, located at 8th and L Street downtown. This predecessor to Alaska Regional was a joint venture between local physicians and the Presbyterian Church. In 1976 the hospital moved to it's present location on DeBarr Road, and is now a 254 bed licensed and accredited facility. Alaska Regional has expanded services and in 1994, Alaska Regional joined with HCA, one of the nation's largest healthcare providers.
Alaska Native Medical Center on Tudor Road, provides medical care and therapeutic health care to Native Alaskans 229 tribes of Eskimos and Indians at the Anchorage site and at 15 satellite facilities throughout the state. ANMC specialists also travel to clinics in the bush to provide care. The 150 bed hospital is also a teaching center for the University of Washington's regional medical education program. ANMC houses an office of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium and Southcentral Foundation jointly own and manage ANMC.
Utilities
A full complement of utilities is available within the Anchorage area. Two electric companies provide service, depending on where you live within the Municipality of Anchorage. They are: Municipal Light Power (ML P) and Chugach Electric Association.
A municipally owned utility since 1932, ML P supplies high quality and reliable electric power to more than 30,000 residential and commercial customers in the Anchorage area. Chugach Electric Association is a not for profit, member owned cooperative that was formed in 1948.
Most homes have natural gas fueled heat. ENSTAR Natural Gas Company is the sole provider for Anchorage, serving some 90 percent of the city's population. While some homes in Anchorage use private wells and septic systems, the Municipality of Anchorage owns and operates the Water and Wastewater Utility serving an approximate population base of 214,000.
Shopping and entertainment
Anchorage has restaurants and places to shop. Anchorage 5th Avenue Mall, located in the heart of downtown Anchorage, has 110 stores including Nordstrom, JCPenny, and the Gap.
There is a full size family owned shopping mall in Anchorage: Dimond Center .
The Mall at Sears located on East Northern Lights Boulevard has great shopping and food court in the center of town. The Northway Mall is located on Penland Parkway near Airport Heights and the Glenn Highway. Ship Creek Center is a place that has Alaska, Russian gifts, dining, groceries and dancing.
Points of interest
There are features of Anchorage that make it unique: the large tidal range multiple, beautiful cross country ski trails America's highest percentage of licensed airplane pilots (with several airports and landing strips in the city or nearby) a very low population density for a city its size frequent small earthquakes spring windstorms ("Chinook winds") active volcanoes nearby (to the southwest, in the Alaska Range, volcanoes such as Mount Spurr, Augustine Volcano, Mount Redoubt, and others have coated the city with ash in recent years) its extreme youth (it was founded in 1915 but didn't grow much until the 1940s) and much else. Despite this, or perhaps because of it, Anchorage is definitely an ''American'' city, replete with a vibrant business climate, large shopping malls, traffic congestion (one can't easily move about by foot and public transportation in the middle of winter), suburban style subdivisions and two suburbs, Eagle River and Chugiak, unless one counts the massive numbers of commuters who drive from as far away as the Matanuska Valley communities of Wasilla and Palmer.
Anchorage has been named an All America City in the years 1956, 1965, 1984 85 and most recently in 2002. The city won its latest award based on civic activities like the 2001 Special Olympics Winter Games , and Bridge Builders .
See also
South Central Alaska
Neighborhoods of Anchorage, Alaska
Port of Anchorage
References
(United States Census Bureau). URL accessed on December 30, 2005.
(National Weather Service). URL accessed on December 30, 2005.
The Weather Channel (1995 2005). . URL retrieved on December 30, 2005.
(Long Range Transportation Plan). URL accessed on January 18, 2006.
. URL accessed on January 21, 2006.
. URL accessed on January 21, 2006.
External links
official site
Category:All America City
Category:Cities in Alaska
Category:Coastal cities
Category:Independent cities in the United States
af:Anchorage, Alaska
bg:
da:Anchorage
de:Anchorage
es:Anchorage
fi:Anchorage
fr:Anchorage
gl:Anchorage
hu:Anchorage
io:Anchorage, Alaska
it:Anchorage
ja:
ko:
lt:Ankorid as
nl:Anchorage
no:Anchorage
pl:Anchorage (Alaska)
pt:Anchorage
ru:
sv:Anchorage
uk:
zh:
An '''argument''' is a collected series of statements to establish a definite proposition, and may refer to:
logical argument, a demonstration of a proof, or using logical reasoning for persuasion
oral argument, a verbal presentation to a judge by a lawyer
verb argument, a phrase in a sentence that qualifies a verb
heuristic argument, a proof or demonstration relying on experimental results, or one which is not fully rigorous
ontological argument, a proof by intuition or reason of the existence of God
political argument, the use of logic rather than propaganda in promoting political ideas
doublespeak argument, the use of misleading or irrelevant reasoning by one side during a debate
javelin argument, a cosmological reasoning about the infinite size of the universe
''The Argument'', an album by the band Fugazi released in 2001
argument (literature), the brief summary at the beginning of a section of a poem
grand argument story, a type of story that is intended to be conceptually complete
In '''mathematics''', '''argument''' may also mean:
independent variable or input of a function: the argument of mathf(x) math is mathx math
complex argument, the angular component of a complex number represented in polar coordinates
argument principle, a theorem in complex analysis about meromorphic functions inside and on a closed contour
diagonal argument, a type of proof over an infinite domain, used to identify the cardinal class of the real numbers
probabilistic argument, any proof using probability theory
In '''Computer Science''', '''argument''' may also mean:
argument (computer science), an input to a subprogram or subroutine
See also
Category:Philosophical arguments
Argument form, a method of logically analyzing sentences
Argumentation theory, the science and theory of civil debates
Argumentative, a type of evidentiary objection to a question for a witness during a trial
Default argument, an actual parameter to a program that is used when no other actual parameter is provided
Existence of God, contains lists of common ontological arguments for and arguments against the existence of God
Toulmin Model, The model of an argument
Distinction without a difference
da:Argument
de:Argument (Begriffskl rung)
et:Argument (t psustus)
es:Argumento
fr:Argument
ia:Argumento
io:Argumento
nl:Argument
pl:Argument
sl:Argument
fi:Argumentti
sv:Argument
border 2 align right cellpadding 4 cellspacing 0 style "margin: 0.25em 1em 1em background: f9f9f9 border: 1px aaa solid border collapse: collapse font size: 95 "
font size " 1"'''''Apollo 11''''' font
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Mission Insignia
colspan "2" align "center"
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Mission Statistics
'''Mission name:''' ''Apollo 11''
'''Call sign:''' Command module:br ''Columbia''br Lunar module:br ''Eagle''
'''Number ofbr Crew:''' 3
'''Launch:''' July 16, 1969br 13:32:00 UTCbr Kennedy Space Center, Floridabr LC 39A
'''Lunarbr landing:''' July 20, 1969br 20:17:40 UTCbr Sea of Tranquilitybr 0 40' 26.69" N,br 23 28' 22.69" E br (based on the IAUbr Mean Earth Polar Axisbr coordinate system)
'''Lunar EVAbr length:''' 2 h 31 min 40 s
'''Lunar surfacebr time:''' 21 h 36 min 20 s
'''Lunar samplebr mass:''' 21.55 kg (47.5 lb)
'''Splashdown:''' July 24, 1969br 16:50:35 UTCbr
'''Time inbr lunar orbit:''' 59 h 30 min 25.79 s
'''Mass:''' ''(see missionbr parameters)''
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Crew Picture
colspan "2" align "center" brsmallL R: Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin small
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" ''Apollo 11'' Crew
align right
align center width 160 '''''"That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind."'''''br Neil Armstrong
'''''Apollo 11''''' was an American space mission, part of the Apollo program and the first manned mission to land on the Moon. It launched on July 16, 1969. On July 20, mission commander Neil Armstrong and pilot Edwin 'Buzz' Aldrin became the first humans to set foot on the Moon.
Crew
Neil Armstrong (flew in ''Gemini 8'' ''Apollo 11''), commander
Edwin 'Buzz' Aldrin (flew in ''Gemini 12'' ''Apollo 11''), lunar module pilot
Michael Collins (flew in ''Gemini 10'' ''Apollo 11''), command module pilot
Backup crew
James Lovell (flew in ''Gemini 7'', ''Gemini 12'', ''Apollo 8'', ''Apollo 13''), commander
Fred Haise (flew in ''Apollo 13''), lunar module pilot
Bill Anders (flew in ''Apollo 8''), command module pilot
Support crew
Ron Evans (flew in ''Apollo 17'')
Ken Mattingly (flew in ''Apollo 16'', ''STS 4'', ''STS 51 C'')
Jack Swigert (flew in ''Apollo 13'')
Bill Pogue (flew in ''Skylab 4'')
Mission highlights
Launch and lunar landing
The ''Apollo 11'' mission launched from the
Kennedy Space Center on July 16, 1969 at 13:32 UTC (9:32 A.M. local time) and entered Earth orbit 12 minutes later. After one and a half orbits, the third stage engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon. About 30 minutes later, the command service module pair separated from the last remaining Saturn V stage, turned around, and docked its nose to the top of the lunar module still nestled in the Lunar Module Adaptor
''Apollo 11'' passed behind the Moon on July 19 and soon after fired its main rocket, entering into lunar orbit. In the several orbits that followed, the crew got passing views of their landing site.
The first ''Apollo'' landing site, in the southern Sea of Tranquility about 20 km (12 mi) southwest of the crater Sabine D, was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated ''Ranger 8'' and ''Surveyor 5'' landers, as well as by ''Lunar Orbiter'' mapping spacecraft, and therefore unlikely to present major landing or Extra vehicular activity (EVA) challenges. Armstrong bestowed the name Tranquillity Base on the landing site immediately after touchdown.
.
On July 20, 1969, while on the far side of the Moon, the lunar module, called ''Eagle'', separated from the Command Module, named ''Columbia''. Collins, now alone aboard ''Columbia'', carefully inspected ''Eagle'' as it pirouetted before him. Soon after, Armstrong and Aldrin fired ''Eagle'''s engine and began their descent. They soon saw that they were "running long" ''Eagle'' was 4 seconds further along its descent trajectory than planned, and would land miles west of the intended site. The LM navigation and guidance computer reported several unusual "program alarms" as it guided the LM's descent. These alarms tore the crew's attention away from the scene outside as the descent proceeded. In NASA's Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, a young controller named Steve Bales told the flight director that it was safe to continue the descent in spite of the alarms. Once they returned their attention to the view outside, the astronauts saw that their computer was guiding them toward a landing site full of large rocks scattered around a large crater. Armstrong took manual control of the lunar module at that point, and guided it to a landing at 20:17 UTC on July 20 with about 30 seconds' worth of fuel left.
carrying ''Apollo 11'' took several seconds to clear the tower on July 16, 1969.
The program alarms were "executive overflows", indicating that the computer could not finish its work in the time allotted. The cause was later determined to be the LM rendezvous radar being left on during the descent, causing the computer to spend unplanned time servicing the unused radar. Steve Bales received a Medal of Freedom for his "go" call under pressure. Although Apollo 11 landed with less fuel than other missions, they also encountered a premature low fuel warning. It was later found caused by the lunar gravity permitting greater propellant 'slosh', uncovering a fuel sensor extra baffles in the tanks were subsequently added.
At 2:56 UTC on July 21, six and a half hours after landing, Armstrong made his descent to the Moon surface and took his famous "one giant leap for mankind." Aldrin joined him, and the two spent two and a half hours drilling core samples, photographing what they saw and collecting rocks.
They planned placement of the Early Apollo Scientific Experiment Package (EASEP) and the U.S. flag by studying their landing site through ''Eagle'''s twin triangular windows, which gave them a 60 field of view. Preparation
required longer than the two hours scheduled. Armstrong had some initial difficulties squeezing through the hatch with his PLSS. According to veteran moonwalker John Young, a redesign of the LM to incorporate a smaller hatch was not followed by a redesign of the PLSS backpack, so some of the highest heart rates recorded from ''Apollo'' astronauts occurred during LM egress and ingress.
poses on the Moon allowing Neil Armstrong to photograph both of them using the visor's reflection.
The Remote Control Unit controls on Armstrong's chest prevented him from seeing his feet. While climbing down the nine rung ladder, Armstrong pulled a D ring to deploy the Modular Equipment Stowage Assembly (MESA) folded against ''Eagle'''s side and activate the TV camera. The first images used a Slow scan television system and were picked up at Goldstone in the USA but with better fidelity by Honeysuckle Creek in Australia. Minutes later the TV was switched to normal television, and the feed was switched to the more sensitive radio telescope station at the Parkes Observatory in Australia. Despite some technical and weather difficulties, ghostly black and white images of the first lunar EVA were received and were immediately broadcast to at least 600 million people on Earth.
After describing the surface ("very fine grained... almost like a powder"), Armstrong stepped off ''Eagle'''s footpad and into history as the first human to set foot on another world. He reported that moving in the Moon's gravity, one sixth of Earth's, was "perhaps even easier than the simulations."
In addition to fulfilling President John F. Kennedy's mandate to land a man on the Moon before the end of the 1960s, ''Apollo 11'' was an engineering test of the Apollo system therefore, Armstrong snapped photos of the LM so engineers would be able to judge its post landing condition. He then collected a contingency soil sample using a sample bag on a stick. He folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on his right thigh. He removed the TV camera from the MESA, made a panoramic sweep, and mounted it on a tripod 12 m (40 ft) from the LM. The TV camera cable remained partly coiled and presented a tripping hazard throughout the EVA.
Aldrin joined him on the surface and tested methods for moving around, including two footed kangaroo hops. The PLSS backpack created a tendency to tip backwards, but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance. Loping became the preferred method of movement. The astronauts reported that they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead. The fine soil was quite slippery. Aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into ''Eagle'''s shadow produced no temperature change inside the suit, though the helmet was warmer in sunlight, so he felt cooler in shadow.
encountered Maximum Dynamic Pressure (Max Q) at about 1 minute 20 seconds into the flight (altitude 12.5 km, 4 km downrange, velocity 440m s).
Together the astronauts planted the U.S. flag, then took a phone call from President Richard Nixon.
The MESA failed to provide a stable work platform and was in shadow, slowing work somewhat. As they worked, the moonwalkers kicked up gray dust which soiled the outer part of their suits, the integrated thermal meteoroid garment.
They deployed the EASEP, which included a passive seismograph and a laser ranging retroreflector. Then Armstrong loped about 120 m (400 ft) from the LM to snap photos at the rim of East Crater while Aldrin collected two core tubes. He used the geological hammer to pound in the tubes the only time the hammer was used on ''Apollo 11''. The astronauts then collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles. Many of the surface activities took longer than expected, so they had to stop documented sample collection halfway through the allotted 34 min.
thumb right 300px Neil Armstrong works at the LM in one of the few photos taken of him from the lunar surface. NASA photo as11 40 5886
During this period Mission Control used a coded phrase to warn Armstrong that his metabolic rates were high and that he should slow down. He was moving rapidly from task to task as time ran out. Rates remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts throughout the walk, however, so Mission Control granted the astronauts a 15 minute extension.
Lunar ascent and return
Aldrin entered ''Eagle'' first. With some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing more than 22 kg (48 lb) of lunar surface material to the LM hatch using a flat cable pulley device called the Lunar Equipment Conveyor. Armstrong then jumped to the ladder's third rung and climbed into the LM.
After transferring to LM life support, the explorers lightened the ascent stage for return to lunar orbit by tossing out their PLSS backpacks, lunar overshoes, one Hasselblad camera, and other equipment. Then they lifted off in ''Eagle''nowiki' nowikis ascent stage to rejoin CMP Michael Collins aboard ''Columbia'' in lunar orbit. ''Eagle'' was jettisoned and left in lunar orbit. Later NASA reports mentioned that ''Eagle''nowiki' nowikis orbit had decayed resulting in it impacting in an "uncertain location" on the lunar surface.
After more than 2 hours on the lunar surface, they returned to Collins on board ''Columbia'', bringing 20.87 kilograms of lunar samples with them. The two Moon walkers had left behind scientific instruments such as a retroreflector array used for the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment. They also left an American flag and other mementos, including a plaque (mounted on the LM Descent Stage ladder) bearing two drawings of Earth (of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres), an inscription, and signatures of the astronauts and Richard Nixon. The inscription read:
:''Here Men From Planet EarthbrFirst Set Foot Upon the MoonbrJuly 1969 A.D.brWe Came in Peace For All Mankind.''
The astronauts returned to earth on July 24, welcomed as heroes. The splashdown point was , 2,660 km (1,440 nm) east of Wake Island, or 380 km (210 nm) south of Johnston Atoll, and 24 km (15 mi) from the recovery ship, ''USS Hornet''.
The command module is displayed at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C.
after returing to earth, visited by Richard Nixon.
Contingency television address
The National Archives in Washington, D.C. has a copy of the following contingency memo titled "In Event of Moon Disaster" and dated July 18, 1969, which was prepared by William Safire for President Nixon to read on television, in the event the ''Apollo 11'' astronauts were stranded on the Moon.
:''"Fate has ordained that the men who went to the Moon to explore in peace will stay on the Moon to rest in peace. These brave men, Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin, know that there is no hope for their recovery. But they also know that there is hope for mankind in their sacrifice.''
:''These two men are laying down their lives in mankind's most noble goal: the search for truth and understanding. They will be mourned by their families and friends they will be mourned by their nation they will be mourned by the people of the world they will be mourned by a Mother Earth that dared send two of her sons into the unknown.''
:''In their exploration, they stirred the people of the world to feel as one in their sacrifice, they bind more tightly the brotherhood of man. In ancient days, men looked at stars and saw their heroes in the constellations. In modern times, we do much the same, but our heroes are epic men of flesh and blood.''
:''Others will follow, and surely find their way home. Man's search will not be denied. But these men were the first, and they will remain the foremost in our hearts.''
film (NASA).
:''For every human being who looks up at the Moon in the nights to come will know that there is some corner of another world that is forever mankind."''
The last line of the statement is reminiscent of a Rupert Brooke poem called "The Soldier". The poem starts:
:''If I should die, think only this of me:brThat there's some corner of a foreign fieldbrThat is forever England.''
Following this address, radio communications with the moon would have been cut off, the astronauts left alone to die, while a clergyman was to commend their souls to "the deepest of the deep" in the fashion of a burial at sea.
Gallery
gallery
Image:Apollo11.png Aldrin stands next to the Passive Seismic Experiment Package with the Lunar Module in the background.
Image:Aldrin near Module leg.jpg Aldrin inspects the LM landing gear.
Image:Apollo11.1000.jpg Aldrin unpacks experiments from the LM.
Image:Buzz Aldrin with U.S. flag.jpg Aldrin with the U.S. flag
Image:23 A11east.jpg Panoramic Assembly of East Crater
gallery
Communications link
Early in the planning of the Project Apollo, NASA decided to combine all communications between spacecraft and Earth into a single multiplexed feed called 'The Unified S Band System', including audio communications, television images, crew medical telemetry and the spacecraft systems telemetry.
The signal was picked up by three purpose built stations (Goldstone (California), Honeysuckle Creek (Australia) and Fresnedillas (Spain) and backed up by deep space network stations (known as 'wing stations') in Australia, Spain and the United States. At first, the signal was routed to Greenbelt, Maryland, by way of submarine telephone cables, using twelve voice circuits. The signal was divided into twelve parts using inverse multiplexing, sent onto the circuits, and reintegrated in Maryland, before being sent on to NASA in Houston.
Intelsat satellites began taking over the trans oceanic transmissions toward the end of the 1960s, and NASA ended its contracts for the submarine telephone circuits, which were then reallocated by telephone administrations for normal voice use.
On 14 July 1969, the Intelsat satellite over the Atlantic failed. A replacement was launched on 16 July, but went into a useless orbit and would not be reoriented in time to be used. The Early Bird satellite was activated, but thought it might not have enough power to get a signal to the United States. The Australia station was vital to picking up the signal during the moonwalks, or keeping the astronauts waiting on the moon eight hours before venturing out. A communications team was dispatched to Spain to begin setting up the telephone circuits for NASA's inverse multiplexed signal.
European telecommunications administrators, mostly government post offices, were not accustomed to doing the business required: they would normally require telegram messages to be exchanged, with top level administrative approval, but the twelve circuits had to be recovered from six countries to be made available to NASA, which had set a time limit two hours before launch, or the launch would be canceled. It would be the last ideal launch window before 1970. Other launch windows had been missed due to spacecraft equipment problems. An official with the Spanish communications authority helped the team secure the circuits with his own personal list of contacts.
The last circuit using inverse multiplexing was accepted by NASA just minutes before the time limit. Three days later, the transmissions from the Moon were picked up in Spain, relayed to the United States over the undersea circuits, and made available by NASA to the Americas. They were beamed across the Pacific Ocean, and from the Far East were carried on the Indian Ocean satellite.
The postal telephone authority in West Germany turned a large radio dish to aim at the Indian Ocean satellite, picking up the signal from Australia and providing it to Western Europe, therefore, viewers in Western Europe saw Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon a full half second later than those in the United States, and some 1.8 seconds after it actually happened.
Had this vital communications link not been restored, the pledge of President John F. Kennedy to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade would have been missed.
Mission trivia and urban legends
Trivia
Some internal NASA planning documents referred to the callsigns of the CSM and LM as "Snowcone" and "Haystack" these were quietly changed before being announced to the press.
Shortly after landing, before preparations have begun for the EVA, Aldrin broadcast that
::''This is the LM pilot. I'd like to take this opportunity to ask every person listening in, whoever and wherever they may be, to pause for a moment and contemplate the events of the past few hours and to give thanks in his or her own way.''
:He then took Holy Communion, privately. At this time, NASA was still fighting a lawsuit brought by Madalyn Murray O'Hair (who had objected to the ''Apollo 8'' crew reading from the Book of Genesis), which demanded that their astronauts refrain from religious activities while in space. As such, Aldrin (an Episcopalian) chose to refrain from directly mentioning this. He had kept the plan quiet, not even mentioning it to his wife, and did not reveal it publicly for several years.
Several books indicate that early mission timelines had Buzz Aldrin, not Neil Armstrong, as the first man on the Moon.
A replica of the footprint left by Neil Armstrong is located in Tranquility Park in Houston, Texas the park was dedicated in 1979, a decade after the first moon landing.
The Australian movie, ''The Dish'' (2000), tells the (slightly fictionalised) story of how the images of the moon walk were received by the radio telescope at Parkes Observatory, New South Wales.
According to the HBO mini series ''From the Earth to the Moon'', Michael Collins made the following suggestion as to what Armstrong should say upon stepping onto the lunar surface: "If you had any balls, you'd say 'Oh, my God, what is that thing?' then scream and cut your mic."
Armstrong claims to have said "That's one small step for ''a'' man, one giant leap for mankind.", although the "''a''" is not at all clear in recordings made at ground control. It has been pointed out that the audio and video links were somewhat intermittent (partly due to storms near Parkes Observatory). Recently, digital analysis of the tape by NASA revealed the "a" may have been spoken, but obscured by static.
Folklore
At some point while on the moon Armstrong supposedly said "Good luck Mr. Gorski". Some years later Gorski died, so he felt he could now explain this remark. As a boy, he heard a couple next door arguing, and the wife said: "Oral sex? Is it oral sex you want? You'll get oral sex when the kid next door walks on the moon, Mr. Gorski!" This story is untrue.
Neil Armstrong apparently took a tartan where no tartan had been worn before. A tiny swatch of the Clan Armstrong plaid was affixed to his suit when he walked on the Moon. Another item that Armstrong took with him was a special diamond studded astronaut pin which was given to Deke Slayton by the widows of the ''Apollo 1'' crew. The pin had been intended to be flown in ''Apollo 1'', then given to Deke after the mission, but due to the disaster, the widows ended up giving the pin to him after the funerals. Deke gave the pin to Neil to leave at Tranquility Base.
Two main conspiracy theories surround the mission.
Firstly that the landing was a hoax. This is generally discounted, although it has slowly grown in popularity, particularly since the release of the movie ''Capricorn One'' (1978), which portrays a NASA attempt to fake a landing on Mars.
Secondly, a less well known urban legend suggests that they were being 'watched' while on the Moon, and had seen alien vehicles there. This grew in popularity after the book ''Someone else is on our Moon'' was published.
According to another legend, a survey undertaken in the 1980s in Morocco revealed that a substantial percentage didn't think man had landed on the Moon this was not due to conspiracy theory, but rather to that segment not having been informed.
See also
Extra vehicular activity
List of spacewalks
Splashdown
List of artificial objects on the Moon
Google Moon
External links
USGS:
References
, discussing (mis )quote
Lunar Landing Sites in honor of the first manned Moon landing
Category:Apollo program
Category:Human spaceflights
Category:Lunar spacecraft
Category:1969
ca:Apollo 11
cs:Apollo 11
da:Apollo 11
de:Apollo 11
et:Apollo 11
es:Apollo 11
eo:Apollo 11
fr:Apollo 11
gl:Apolo XI
ko: 11
it:Apollo 11
he: 11
hu:Apollo 11
nl:Apollo 11
ja: 11
no:Apollo 11
nn:Apollo 11
pl:Apollo 11
pt:Apollo 11
ru: 11
sk:Apollo 11
sl:Apollo 11
fi:Apollo 11
sv:Apollo 11
ta: 11
zh: 11
class "infobox" style "font size: 95 width: 20em "
style "font size: larger " '''''Apollo 8'''''
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Mission insignia
colspan "2" style "font size: smaller text align: center "
!colspan "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Mission statistics
'''Mission name:''' Apollo 8
'''Call sign:''' Command module:br ''Apollo 8''
'''Number of crew:''' 3
'''Launch:''' December 21, 1968br 12:51:00 UTCbr Kennedy Space Centerbr LC 39A
'''Lunar orbit:''' Dec 24 09:59:20 UTC br Dec 25 06:10:16 UTC
'''Splashdown:''' December 27, 1968br 15:51:42 UTCbr
'''Duration:''' 6 d 3 h 0 min 42 s
'''Number of lunar orbits:''' 10
'''Time in lunar orbit:''' 20 h 10 min 13.0 s
'''Mass:''' CSM 28,817 kg br LTA 9,026 kg
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Crew picture
colspan "2" align "center" brsmall''Apollo 8'' crew portrait br (L R: Lovell, Anders and Borman) small
!colspan "2" cellspacing "0" cellpadding "2" bgcolor " FFDEAD" Apollo 8 crew
'''''Apollo 8''''' was the second manned mission of the Apollo space program, in which Commander Frank Borman, Command Module Pilot James Lovell and Lunar Module Pilot William Anders became the first humans to leave Earth orbit and to orbit around the Moon. It was also the first manned launch of the Saturn V rocket.
NASA prepared for the mission in only four months. The hardware involved had only been used a few times the Saturn V had launched only twice before, and the Apollo spacecraft had only just finished its first manned mission, ''Apollo 7''. However, the success of the mission paved the way for the successful completion of John F. Kennedy's goal of landing on the Moon before the end of the decade.
After launching on December 21, 1968, the crew took three days to travel to the Moon, which they orbited for 20 hours. While in lunar orbit they made a Christmas Eve television broadcast. This was one of the most watched broadcasts of all time.
Planning
On December 22, 1966, NASA announced the crew for the third manned Apollo flight: Frank Borman, Michael Collins and Bill Anders. Collins was replaced by his backup Jim Lovell, in July 1968, after Collins had to have surgery as he was suffering cervical intervertebral disc herniation an intervertebral disc had slipped into the spinal cavity and required two vertebrae to be fused together. Collins recovered and went on to be the Command Module Pilot for ''Apollo 11''.
In September 1967, the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Texas, proposed a series of missions that would lead up to a manned lunar landing. Seven mission types were outlined, each testing a specific set of components and tasks each previous step needed to be completed successfully before the next mission type could be undertaken. These were:
'''A''' Unmanned Command Service Module (CSM) test br
'''B''' Unmanned Lunar Module (LM) test br
'''C''' Manned CSM in low Earth orbit br
'''D''' Manned CSM and LM in low Earth orbit br
'''E''' Manned CSM and LM in an elliptical Earth orbit with an apogee of 4600mi (7400km) br
'''F''' Manned CSM and LM in lunar orbit br
'''G''' Manned lunar landing
Of all the components of the Apollo system, the Lunar Module (LM), which would eventually be used to land on the Moon, presented the most problems. It was behind schedule and when the first model was shipped to Cape Canaveral in June 1968, over 101 separate defects were discovered. Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation, which was the lead contractor for the LM, predicted that the first mannable LM, to be used for the D mission, would not be ready until at least February 1969, delaying the entire sequence.
George Low, the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, proposed a solution in August. Since the Command Service Module (CSM) would be ready three months before the Lunar Module, they could fly a CSM only mission in December 1968. But instead of just repeating the flight of ''Apollo 7'', the C mission that would fly the CSM in Earth orbit, they could send the CSM all the way to the Moon and maybe even enter into orbit. This mission was dubbed the "C Prime" mission. This new mission would allow NASA to test procedures that would be used on the manned lunar landings that would otherwise have to wait until ''Apollo 10'', the F mission. There were also concerns from the CIA that the Soviets were planning their own circumlunar flight for December to upstage the Americans once again (see Zond program).
, 1968.
Almost every senior manager at NASA agreed with this new mission. The only person who needed some convincing was James E. Webb, the NASA administrator. However, outvoted by the rest of the agency, he gave his approval. After leading the agency for eight years, he would resign just four days before the launch of ''Apollo 7'', the first manned Apollo flight.
Deke Slayton, the Director of Flight Crew Operations, decided to swap the crews of the D and E missions. James McDivitt, the original commander of the D mission, has said he was never offered the circumlunar flight but would probably have turned it down, as he wanted to fly the lunar module. Borman, on the other hand, jumped at the chance: his original mission would just have been a repeat of the previous flight, except in a higher orbit. This swap also meant a swap of spacecraft Borman's crew would now use CSM 103, while McDivitt's crew would use CSM 104.
In the end, the E mission was canceled as most its objectives had been covered by the ''Apollo 8'' and ''Apollo 9'' flights. Mission managers were also confident that ''Apollo 10'' would also cover the remaining objectives with its lunar orbit flight.
On September 9, the crew entered the simulators to begin their preparation for the flight. By the time the mission flew, the crew would have spent seven hours training for every actual hour of flight. Although all crew members were trained for all aspects of the mission, it was necessary to specialize. Borman, as commander, was given training on controlling the spacecraft during the re entry. Lovell was trained on navigating the spacecraft in case communication was lost with the Earth. Anders was placed in charge of checking the spacecraft was in working order.
It was not until November 12 that a public announcement was made about the change of mission for ''Apollo 8''. Previous to this Thomas O. Paine, the deputy Administrator of NASA, had made a fleeting remark that all options were being considered.
Borman's main concern during the four months leading up to the launch was keeping the flight plan as simple as possible, not accepting any addition that went beyond the simple objectives of performing the first manned Saturn V launch, going to the Moon and orbiting it. He made sure that they stayed in lunar orbit only as long as necessary 10 orbits.
The crew, now living in the crew quarters at Kennedy Space Center, received a visit from Charles Lindbergh the night before the launch. They talked about how before his flight, Lindbergh had used a piece of string to measure the distance from New York to Paris on a globe and from that calculated the fuel needed for the flight. The total was a tenth of the amount that the Saturn V would burn every second.
The Saturn V
.
The Saturn V rocket used by ''Apollo 8'' was designated SA 503, the third flight model. When it was erected in the Vertical Assembly Building ! Editor's Note: At that time it was called the Vertical Assembly Building on 20 December, 1967, it was thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned test flight carrying a boilerplate Command Service Module. Although ''Apollo 6'' had suffered several major problems (it suffered severe pogo oscillation during its first stage and two second stage engines shutdown early), Marshall Space Flight Center, in charge of the Saturn V, was confident that it could solve all the issues without the need for another unmanned test flight. The SA 503 mission was thus changed to a manned one.
However, NASA managers did impose some restrictions on a manned flight taking place: the S II second stage had to undergo cryogenic testing at the Mississippi Test Facility and other changes were to be made to "man rate" the vehicle. So on April 30, the Saturn V was unstacked and the S II second stage shipped by barge to the test site. The spark igniters on the second and third stage engines were also modified. In May 1968 a leak was found in a first stage engine, requiring it to be replaced.
With only two launches of the Saturn V under its belt, the ground crew at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) was having problems keeping to the schedule. The Grumman crew was also having issues with the lunar module. Concern was expressed at the fact so much work had to be done on the lunar module after it had shipped to the Cape. The ascent engine developed leaks that caused redesigns and valve changes.
Then in August 1968, the entire mission changed. SA 503 would launch men to the Moon and would not be carrying a lunar module, instead carrying a mass equivalent, called a lunar module test article (LTA), similar to ones used for ''Apollo 4'' and ''Apollo 6''. In order to speed up the pre launch preparations, much of the modification of the Saturn V was taken out of the hands of KSC and given to appropriate development centers only changes that affected crew safety were made.
The ''Apollo 8'' spacecraft was placed on top of the rocket on September 21 and the rocket made the slow 3 mile (5 km) journey to the launch pad on 9 October. Testing continued all through December until the day before launch.
The SA 503 designation stood for Saturn Apollo, and was used by NASA departments concerned with the launch vehicle. However, departments concerned with the manned flight often used AS 503, standing for Apollo Saturn both of these designations were used at the time to refer to the mission as a whole. The 503 number indicated that it was flight number ''3'' (5'''03''') of the Saturn ''V'' ('''5'''03).
The mission
Launch and trans lunar injection
, as the Moon was not visible at the time of launch (NASA)
''Apollo 8'' launched at 7:51:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on December 21, 1968. The entire launch phase was practically flawless with only minor problems. The S IC first stage's engines underperformed by 0.75 , causing the engines to burn for 2.45 seconds longer than planned. Towards the end of the second stage burn, the rocket underwent pogo oscillations that Frank Borman estimated were of the order of 12 Hz and about 0.25 g ( 2.5 m s). The first manned Saturn V placed the spacecraft into a 112.8 mi by 118.9 mi (181.5 km by 191.3 km) Earth orbit with a period of 88 minutes and 10 seconds. The apogee was also slightly higher than intended, with a planned circular orbit of 115 mi (185 km). The S IC impacted the Atlantic Ocean at and the S II at .
For the next 2 hours and 38 minutes the crew and Mission Control worked to check that the spacecraft was in working in order and ready for Trans Lunar Injection (TLI), the burn that would put the spacecraft on a trajectory to the Moon. At the same time the crew transformed the capsule from a rocket payload to a spacecraft. And the S IVB third stage had to be in working order. On the previous unmanned test, the S IVB had failed to re ignite.
During the flight there would be three capsule communicators (usually referred to as "capcoms") on a rotating roster. These were the only people who would normally communicate with the crew. Michael Collins was the first of these on duty and at 2 hours, 27 minutes and 22 seconds after launch radioed "''Apollo 8''. You are Go for TLI". Mission Control had given official permission for the crew to go to the moon. Over the next twelve minutes before the burn, the crew continued to monitor the spacecraft and the rocket. The S IVB third stage rocket ignited on time and burned perfectly for 5 minutes and 17 seconds. The burn increased the velocity of the spacecraft to 35,505 ft s (10,822 m s) and their altitude at the end of the burn was 215.4 mi (346.7 km). They were the fastest humans in history.
Now that the S IVB had performed its required tasks it was jettisoned. The crew then rotated the spacecraft to take some photographs of the spent stage, as well as practiced flying in formation with it. As the crew rotated the spacecraft around they had their first views of the Earth as they moved away from it. This was the first time humans had been able to see the entire Earth in one go.
Borman became worried that the S IVB was staying too close to the CSM and suggested to Mission Control that the crew perform a separation maneuver. Mission Control at first suggested pointing the spacecraft towards Earth and using the Reaction Control System (RCS) thrusters on the Service Module to add 3 ft s (0.9 m s) away from the Earth, but Borman did not want to lose sight of the S IVB. After much discussion it was decided to burn in this direction anyway but at 9 ft s (2.7 m s). These discussions ended up putting the crew an hour behind their flight plan.
Five hours after launch, mission control commanded the S IVB booster to vent its remaining fuel through its engine bell to change its trajectory such that it would flyby the Moon and enter into a solar orbit, so as to pose no future hazard to the crew. It went into a 0.99 by 0.92 AU solar orbit with an inclination of 23.47 and a period of 340.80 days.
The members of the ''Apollo 8'' crew were the first humans to pass through the Van Allen radiation belts, which extend up to 15,000 mi (25,000 km) from Earth. Although it was predicted that the passage through the belts would cause a radiation dosage of no more than a chest X ray or 1 milligray (during the course of a year, the average human receives a dose of 2 to 3 mGy), there was still interest in the radiation dosages on the crew. So each crewmember wore a Personal Radiation Dosimeter that could be read back to the ground as well as three passive film dosimeters that show the cumulative radiation experienced by the crew. By the end of the mission, the average radiation dose of the crew was 1.6 mGy.
Coasting to the Moon
. South is up with South America in the middle
Jim Lovell's main job as Command Module Pilot was to act as navigator. Although Mission Control performed all the actual navigation calculation, it was necessary that in case of communication loss the crew could navigate their way home. This was done by star sightings using a sextant built into the spacecraft, measuring the angle between a star and the Earth's (or the Moon's) horizon. This proved to be difficult, as the venting by the S IVB had caused a large cloud of debris to form around the spacecraft, making it hard to distinguish what were the actual stars.
By seven hours into the mission, the delay in moving away from the S IVB and Lovell's star sightings meant that they were behind schedule on the flight plan by about one hour and 40 minutes. The crew now placed the spacecraft into Passive Thermal Control (PTC), or what is more aptly called barbecue mode. This had the spacecraft roll about one rotation per hour, along its long axis in order to ensure even heat distribution of the spacecraft. In direct sunlight, the spacecraft could be heated to over 200 C while the parts in shadow would be 100 C. These temperatures could cause the heat shield to crack or propellant lines to burst. As it was impossible to get a perfect roll, the spacecraft actually swept out a cone as it rotated. This would have to be trimmed every half hour as it started to get larger and larger.
The first mid course correction came 11 hours into the flight. Testing on the ground had shown there was a small chance that the Service Propulsion System (SPS) engine would explode when burned for long periods unless its combustion chamber was 'coated' first. This could be done by burning the engine for a short period. This first correction burn was only 2.4 seconds and added about 20.4 ft s (6.2 m s) prograde (in the direction of travel). This was less than the 24.8 ft s (7.5 m s) planned, and the shortfall was due to a bubble of helium in the oxidizer lines causing lower than expected fuel pressure, requiring the crew to use the small Reaction Control System (RCS) thrusters to make up the shortfall. Two later planned midcourse corrections were cancelled as the trajectory was found to be perfect.
Eleven hours into the flight, the crew had been awake for over 16 hours, having been awakened about 5 hours before launch. So it was time for Frank Borman to start his scheduled 7 hour sleep period. It proved difficult to sleep. NASA had decided that at least one crewmember should be awake at all times to deal with any issues that might arise. But the constant radio chatter with the ground and the air circulation fans made it hard to sleep. As well as this, sleeping in space is a somewhat unnatural experience you cannot rest your head on a pillow and Bill Anders said that he would suddenly jolt awake with the sensation that he was falling.
rocket stage. (NASA)
About an hour after starting his sleep period, Borman requested clearance to take a Seconal sleeping pill, but the pill had little effect. After Borman slept for seven hours fitfully, he awoke feeling ill. He vomited twice, and had a bout of diarrhea that left the spacecraft full of small globules of vomit and feces. The crew cleaned up as best as they could. Borman decided that he did not want the world to know about his medical problems but Lovell and Anders still wanted to tell the ground. They decided to use the Data Storage Equipment (DSE), which could be used by the crew to tape voice recordings and telemetry, which were then dumped to the ground at high speed. After recording a description of Borman's illness they requested that mission control check the recording, as the crew ''"would like an evaluation of the voice comments"''.
A conference between the crew and medical personnel was held using the unoccupied second floor control room (there were two identical control rooms in Houston on the second and third floor, of which only one is used during the course of a mission). During a private communication with the crew, it was decided that there was little to worry about and that it was either a 24 hour flu as Borman thought, or just a reaction to the sleeping pill. In fact it is now thought that he was suffering from Space Adaptation Syndrome, which affects about a third of astronauts during their first day in space as their vestibular system adapts to weightlessness. It had never arisen on previous spacecraft (Mercury and Gemini) as they had been too small to move freely in.
The cruise phase was a relatively uneventful part of the flight, with little happening except for the crew checking that the spacecraft was in working order and they were on course. During this time, NASA scheduled a television broadcast for 31 hours after launch. The camera used was 2 kg and broadcast in black and white only, using a Vidicon tube. It had two lenses: a very wide angle (160 ) lens and a telephoto (9 ) lens.
During this first broadcast the crew gave a tour of the spacecraft and attempted to show how the Earth appeared. However this proved impossible, as the narrow angle lens was difficult to aim without the aid of a monitor to show what it was looking at. Also without proper filters, the image became saturated by any bright source. In the end all the crew could do was show the people watching back on Earth a bright blob. After broadcasting for 17 minutes the rotation of the spacecraft took the High Gain Antenna out of view of the receiving stations on Earth and they ended the transmission with Lovell wishing his mother happy birthday.
By this time the planned sleep periods had completely been abandoned. 32 hours into the flight, Lovell went to bed, 3 hours before he had planned to. A short while later Anders also went to bed after taking a sleeping pill.
Somewhat strangely the crew were unable to see the Moon for much of the outward cruise. Three of the five windows had fogged up, due to outgassed oils from the silicone sealant, and due to the attitude required for the PTC, the Moon was almost impossible to see from inside the spacecraft. In fact it was not until the crew had gone behind the Moon that they would be able to see it for the first time.
A second television broadcast came at 55 hours. This time the crew had managed to rig up filters meant for the still cameras, so that they could acquire images of the Earth through the telephoto lens. Although difficult to aim, as they had to maneuver the entire spacecraft, the crew was able to broadcast back to Earth the first television pictures of the Earth. The crew spent the transmission describing the Earth and what was visible and the colors that could be seen. The transmission lasted 23 minutes.
Lunar sphere of influence
At about 55 hours and 40 minutes into the flight, the crew of ''Apollo 8'' became the first humans to enter the gravitational sphere of influence of another celestial body. Or to put it another way, the Moon's gravitational force became stronger than that of the Earth. At the time it happened, they were 38,759 mi (62,377 km) from the Moon and had a speed of 3,990 ft s (1,216 m s) with respect to the Moon. This historic moment was of little interest to the crew as they still calculated their trajectory with respect to the launch pad at Kennedy Space Center and would do so until they performed their last midcourse correction, when they would switch to a reference frame based on ideal orientation for the second engine burn they would make in lunar orbit. It was only thirteen hours until they would be in lunar orbit.
The last major event before Lunar Orbit Insertion was a second midcourse correction. It was in retrograde (against direction of travel) and slowed the spacecraft down by 2.0 ft s (0.6 m s), in effect lowering the closest distance that the spacecraft would pass the moon. At exactly 61 hours after launch, about 24,200 mi (39,000 km) from the Moon, the crew burned the RCS for 11 seconds. They would now pass 71.7 mi (115.4 km) from the lunar surface.
At 64 hours into the flight, the crew began to prepare for Lunar Orbit Insertion 1 (LOI 1). This maneuver had to be performed perfectly, and due to orbital mechanics had to be on the far side of the Moon, out of contact with the Earth. After Mission Control was polled for a Go No Go decision, the crew was told at 68 hours, they were Go and ''"riding the best bird we can find"''. At 68 hours and 58 minutes, the spacecraft went behind the Moon and out of radio contact with the Earth.
With ten minutes before the LOI 1, the crew began one last check of the spacecraft systems and made sure that every switch was in the correct place. Then they finally got their first glimpses of the Moon. They had been flying over the unlit side, and it was Lovell who saw the first shafts of sunlight obliquely illuminating the lunar surface. But the burn was only two minutes away so the crew had little time to appreciate the view.
Lunar orbit
Igniting at 69 hours, 8 minutes and 16 seconds after launch, the SPS burned for 4 minutes and 13 seconds, placing the crew of ''Apollo 8'' in orbit around the Moon. The crew described this as being the longest four minutes of their lives. If the burn had not lasted exactly the right amount of time, the spacecraft could have ended up in a highly elliptical lunar orbit or even flung off into space. If it lasted too long they could have ended up impacting the Moon. After making sure the spacecraft was working, they finally had a chance to look at the Moon, which they would orbit for the next 20 hours.
On Earth, Mission Control continued to wait. If the crew had not burned the engine or the burn had not lasted the planned length of time the crew would appear early from behind the Moon. However this time came and went without ''Apollo 8'' reappearing. And then exactly at the predicted moment, the signal was received from the spacecraft indicating it was in a 193.3 mi by 69.5 mi (311.1 km by 111.9 km) orbit about the Moon.
After reporting on the status of the spacecraft, Lovell gave the first description of what the lunar surface looked like:
:The Moon is essentially grey, no color looks like plaster of Paris or sort of a grayish beach sand. We can see quite a bit of detail. The Sea of Fertility doesn't stand out as well here as it does back on Earth. There's not as much contrast between that and the surrounding craters. The craters are all rounded off. There's quite a few of them, some of them are newer. Many of them look like especially the round ones look like hit by meteorites or projectiles of some sort. Langrenus is quite a huge crater it's got a central cone to it. The walls of the crater are terraced, about six or seven different terraces on the way down.
Lovell continued to describe the terrain that they were passing over. One of the crew's major tasks was reconnaissance of the planned landing sites on the Moon, especially one in Mare Tranquillitatis that would be the ''Apollo 11'' landing site. The launch time of ''Apollo 8'' had been chosen to give the best lighting conditions for the site. A film camera had been set up in one of the windows to record a frame every second of the Moon below. And Bill Anders would spend much of the next 20 hours taking as many photographs as he could of targets of interest. By the end of the mission the crew would take 700 photographs of the Moon and 150 of the Earth.
.
Throughout the hour that the spacecraft was in contact with the Earth, Borman kept asking how the data for the SPS looked. He wanted to make sure that the engine was working and could be used to return early to the Earth if necessary. He also asked that they receive a Go No Go decision before they passed behind the Moon on each orbit.
As they reappeared for their second pass in front of the Moon, the crew set up the television to broadcast a view of the lunar surface. Anders described the craters that they were passing over. At the end of this second orbit they performed the eleven second LOI 2 burn of the SPS to circularize the orbit to 70.0 mi by 71.3 mi (112.6 km by 114.8 km).
Over the next two orbits the crew continued to keep check of the spacecraft and to observe and photograph the Moon. During the third pass, Borman read a small prayer for his church, as he was meant to lay read during the Midnight service at St. Christopher's Episcopal Church near Seabrook, Texas but due to the Apollo 8 flight was unable. A fellow parishioner and engineer at Mission Control, Rod Rose, suggested that Borman read the prayer which could be recorded and then replayed during the service.
It was as the spacecraft came out from behind the Moon for its fourth pass across the front that the crew witnessed an event never before seen Earthrise. Anders glanced out the window and saw a blue and white orb and realized it was the Earth. Instantly the crew understood that they needed to take a photograph of this. Anders took both the first photograph, which was black and white, and then later the more famous color photo. (After the flight, Borman and Anders both claimed they took the first earthrise photo (Lovell also did, but more as a joke than anything else) it was determined that it was probably Anders.)
Anders continued to take photographs while Lovell took the controls of the spacecraft so that Borman could get some rest. As always resting was difficult in the cramped and noisy capsule, though Borman was able to doze for two orbits. He would awaken at times to ask a question about their status, only to be told that everything was going fine.
Borman did wake up however when he started to hear his fellow crewmembers make mistakes. They were beginning to not understand questions and would have to ask for the answers to be repeated. Borman realized that everyone was extremely tired having not had a good night's sleep in over three days. Taking command, he ordered Anders and Lovell to get some sleep and that the rest of the flight plan regarding observing the Moon be scrubbed. At first Anders protested saying that he was fine, but Borman would not be swayed. At last Anders agreed as long as the commander would set up the camera to continue to take automatic shots of the Moon. Borman also remembered that there was a second television broadcast planned, and with so many people expected to be watching he wanted to crew to be alert. For the next two orbits Anders and Lovell slept while Borman sat at the helm.
As they rounded the Moon for the ninth time, the second television transmission began. Borman introduced the crew, followed by each man giving his impression of the lunar surface and what it was like to be orbiting the Moon. Borman described it as being ''"a vast, lonely, forbidding type of existence or expanse of nothing"''. And then after talking about what they were flying over, Anders said that the crew had a message for all those on Earth.
The only thing left for the crew now was to perform the Trans Earth Injection or TEI, which would occur 2 hours after the end of the television transmission. This was the most critical burn of the whole flight. If the SPS failed to ignite, then the crew would be stuck in orbit around the Moon, with only about 5 more days of oxygen and no chance of escape. And once again the burn had to be performed while the crew was out of contact with Earth, on the far side of the Moon.
The burn occurred perfectly on time. The spacecraft telemetry was reacquired as it re emerged from behind the Moon at 89 hours, 28 minutes, and 39 seconds, the exact time predicted. When voice contact was regained, Lovell announced, "Please be informed, there is a Santa Claus", to which Ken Mattingly, the capcom, replied, "That's affirmative, You are the best ones to know". It was Christmas Day, 1968.
Unplanned manual re alignment
Later, Lovell used some otherwise idle time to do some navigational sightings, maneuvering the module to view various stars by using the computer keyboard. However, an accidental entry erased some of the computer's memory, which caused the inertial measuring unit (IMU) to think the module was in the same relative position it had been in before lift off and fire the thrusters to "correct" the module's attitude.
Once the crew realized why the computer had changed the module's attitude, they realized they would have to re enter data that would tell the computer its real position. It took Lovell ten minutes to figure out the right numbers, using the thrusters to get the stars Rigel and Sirius aligned, and another fifteen minutes to enter the corrected data into the computer.
Sixteen months later, Lovell would once again have to perform a similar manual re alignment, under more critical conditions, during the ''Apollo 13'' mission, after that module's IMU had to be turned off to conserve energy. In his 1994 book, ''Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13'' (later re titled ''Apollo 13'' when the movie based on it, ''Apollo 13'' came out), Lovell wrote, "My training on Apollo 8 came in handy!" In that book he dismissed the incident as a 'planned experiment', requested by the ground crew. However, in subsequent interviews Lovell has acknowledged that the incident was an accident, caused by his mistake, as described in Robert Zimmerman's 1998 book ''Genesis: The Story of Apollo 8''.
Cruise back to Earth and re entry
The cruise back to Earth was mostly a time for the crew to relax and monitor the spacecraft. As long as the trajectory specialists had calculated everything correctly, the spacecraft would re enter 2 days after TEI and splashdown in the Pacific.
On Christmas afternoon, the crew made their fifth and final television broadcast. This time they gave a tour of the spacecraft, showing how an astronaut lived in space. When they had finished broadcasting they found a small present from Deke Slayton in the food locker real turkey with stuffing and three miniature bottles of brandy (which remained unopened). There were also small presents to the crew from their wives.
.
After two uneventful days the crew prepared for re entry. The computer would control the re entry and all the crew had to do was put the spacecraft in the correct attitude, blunt end forward. If the computer broke down, Borman would take over.
After separating from the Service Module, all the crew could do was sit and wait. Six minutes before they hit the top of the atmosphere, the crew saw the Moon rising above the Earth's horizon, just as had been predicted by the trajectory specialists. As they hit the thin outer atmosphere they noticed it was becoming hazy outside as glowing plasma formed around the capsule. The capsule started slowing down and the deceleration peaked at 6 g (59 m s). With the computer controlling the descent by changing the attitude of the capsule, ''Apollo 8'' rose briefly like a skipping stone before descending to the ocean. At 30,000 feet (9 km) the drogue parachute stabilized the spacecraft and was followed at 10,000 feet (3 km) by the three main parachutes. The spacecraft splashdown position was estimated to be .
When it hit the water, the parachutes dragged the spacecraft over and left it upside down, in what was termed Stable 2 position. As they were buffeted by a 10 foot (3 m) swell, Borman was sick, waiting for the three floatation balloons to right the capsule. It was 43 minutes after splashdown before the first frogman from the USS ''Yorktown'' arrived, as the capsule had landed before sunrise. Forty five minutes later they were on the deck of the aircraft carrier.
The command module is now displayed at the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry, along with a collection of personal items from the flight donated by Lovell and Frank Borman's spacesuit. Jim Lovell's spacesuit can be found at NASA's Glenn Research Center.
Historical importance
''Apollo 8'' came at the end of 1968, a year that had seen much upheaval around the world. Soviet tanks had put a stop to the Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy had been assassinated the Vietnam War had escalated with the Tet Offensive University campuses across the United States had seen rioting and occupation of buildings by students May had seen rioting in Paris that almost led to revolution.
Yet over all these other events, TIME magazine chose the crew of ''Apollo 8'' as their Men of the Year for 1968, recognizing them as the people that most influenced events in the preceding year. They had been the first people to ever leave the gravitational influence of the Earth and orbit another celestial body. They had survived a mission that even the crew themselves had rated as only having a fifty fifty chance of fully succeeding. The effect of ''Apollo 8'' can be summed up by a telegram from a stranger, received by Borman after the mission, that simply stated, "Thank you ''Apollo 8''. You saved 1968."
, 1969 cover of TIME Magazine with the Apollo 8 crew
One of the most famous aspects of the flight was the Earthrise picture that was taken as they came around for their fourth orbit of the Moon. Although it was not the first image taken of the whole Earth nor would it be the last, this was the first time that humans had taken such a picture. Some regard the picture as being the start of the environmentalist movement, with the first Earth Day in 1970.
The mission was the most widely covered by the media since the first American orbital flight, Mercury Atlas 6 by John Glenn in 1962. There were 1200 journalists covering the mission, with the BBC coverage being broadcast in 54 countries in 15 different languages. The Soviet newspaper ''Pravda'' even covered the flight without the usual anti American editorializing. It is estimated that a quarter of the people alive at the time saw either live or delayed the Christmas Eve transmission during the ninth orbit of the Moon it had a tremendous impact. Touring the world after the mission, Borman met with Pope Paul VI he was told "I have spent my entire life trying to say to the world what you did on Christmas Eve."
The militant atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair later caused controversy by bringing a lawsuit against NASA over the reading from ''Genesis'' she wished the courts to ban US astronauts who were all Government employees from public prayer in space. This was eventually rejected by the courts, but it caused NASA to be skittish about the issue of religion throughout the rest of the Apollo program. Buzz Aldrin, on ''Apollo 11'', took communion on the surface of the moon after landing he refrained from mentioning this publicly for several years, and only obliquely referred to it at the time.
Crew
Frank Borman (flew on ''Gemini 7'' ''Apollo 8''), commander
James Lovell (flew on ''Gemini 7'', ''Gemini 12'', ''Apollo 8'' ''Apollo 13''), command module pilot
William Anders (flew on ''Apollo 8''), lunar module pilot
As a note, astronaut Michael Collins, who flew aboard the Gemini 10 mission, was originally slated to fly aboard Apollo 8 as Command Module pilot. A bone spur in his neck that required surgery grounded Collins, requiring Jim Lovell to fly in Collins' place. In early 1969, Collins was reinstated to active flight status, and replaced Fred Haise on the Apollo 11 prime crew as Command Module pilot, while Edwin Aldrin became lunar module pilot. Haise became the backup LM pilot for Apollo 11.
Backup crew
The backup crew trained to take the place of the prime crew in case of illness or death.
Neil Armstrong, (flew on ''Gemini 8'', ''Apollo 11''), commander
Edwin E. Aldrin, (flew on ''Gemini 12'', ''Apollo 11''), command module pilot
Fred Haise, (flew on ''Apollo 13''), lunar module pilot
Support crew
The support crew were not trained to fly the mission but were able to stand in for astronauts in meetings and be involved in the minutiae of mission planning, while the prime and backup crews trained. They often also served as capcoms during the mission.
John Bull (never flew in space)
Vance Brand (flew on ''Apollo Soyuz Test Project'', ''STS 5'', ''STS 41 B'', ''STS 35''
Gerald Carr (flew on ''Skylab 4'')
Ken Mattingly (flew on ''Apollo 16'', ''STS 4'', ''STS 51 C'')
Mission parameters
'''CSM Mass:''' 63,531 lb (28,817 kg)
Earth parking orbit
'''Perigee:''' 112.8 mi (181.5 km)
'''Apogee:''' 118.9 mi (191.3 km)
'''Inclination:''' 32.51
'''Period:''' 88.17 min
Lunar orbit
'''Perilune:''' 69.5 mi (111.9 km)
'''Apolune:''' 193.3 mi (311.1 km)
'''Inclination:''' 12
'''Period:''' 128.7 min
Translunar injection burn
December 21, 1968, 15:41:38 UTC
The Saturn V, S IVB third stage, was fired for a second time. It burned for a total of 318 seconds. ''Apollo 8'' was propelled from an Earth parking orbit velocity of 25,567 ft s (7793 m s) to a translunar trajectory velocity of 35,505 ft s (10,822 m s).
See also
Splashdown
Project Apollo
Space Race
List of lunar astronauts
References
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
in the Encyclopedia Astronautica. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 10, 2005
. Retrieved on March 15, 2005
. Retrieved on March 19, 2005
. Retrieved on March 19, 2005
Chaikin, Andrew (1994). ''A Man On The Moon: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts''. Viking. ISBN 0670814466.
Zimmerman, Robert (1998). ''Genesis: The Story of Apollo 8''. Four Wall Eight Windows. ISBN 1568581181.
Collins, Michael (1975). ''Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journeys''. W. H. Allen. ISBN 0491016034.
Slayton, Donald K. Cassutt, Michael (1995). ''Deke! : An Autobiography''. Forge Books. ISBN 031285918X.
Compiled by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center (1969). ''Analysis of Apollo 8 Photography and Visual Observations''. US Government Printing Office.
Apollo 08
Apollo 08
Apollo 08
Category:1968 in the United States
cs:Apollo 8
de:Apollo 8
fi:Apollo 8
fr:Apollo 8
it:Apollo 8
he: D7 90 D7 A4 D7 95 D7 9C D7 95 8
hu:Apollo 8
nl:Apollo 8
pl:Apollo 8
pt:Apollo 8
sk:Apollo 8
zh: 8
right 300px thumb U.S. Space Shuttle astronaut Bruce McCandless II using a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) outside the ''Challenger'' in 1984. Picture courtesy NASA
An '''astronaut''', '''cosmonaut''' (Russian: ), '''spationaut''' or '''taikonaut''' (''taikongren'', ) is a person who travels into space, or who makes a career of doing so. The criteria for determining who has achieved human spaceflight vary (see edge of space). In the United States, people who travel above an altitude of 50 miles (80km) are designated as astronauts. The FAI defines spaceflight as over 100 km (61 miles). As of October 12, 2005, a total of 448 humans have reached space according to the U.S. definition, 442 people qualify under the FAI definition, while 438 people have reached Earth orbit or beyond. These individuals have spent over 28,000 crew days (or a cumulative total of 76.7 years) in space including over 100 crew days of spacewalks. A person who has traveled in space is said to hold astronaut wings. Astronauts from at least 34 countries have gone into space.
International variations
By convention, a space traveller employed by the Russian Aviation and Space Agency or its Soviet predecessor is called a '''cosmonaut'''. "Cosmonaut" is an anglicisation of the Russian word ''(kosmonavt)'', which in turn derives from the Greek words ''kosmos'' ("universe") and ''nautes'' ("sailor").
In the USA, a space traveller is called an '''astronaut'''. The term derives from the Greek words '' stron'' ("star") and ''nautes,'' ("sailor"). For the most part, "cosmonaut" and "astronaut" are synonyms in all languages, and the usage of choice is often dictated by political reasons. However in the United States, the term "astronaut" is typically applied to the individual as soon as training begins, while in Russia, an individual is not labeled a cosmonaut until successful space flight. The first known use of the term was by Neil R. Jones in his short story ''The Death's Head Meteor'' in 1930. On March 14, 1995 astronaut Norman Thagard became the first American to ride to space on board a Russian launch vehicle, arguably becoming the first American cosmonaut in the process.
European (outside of the UK) space travellers are sometimes, especially in French speaking countries, called '''spationauts''' (a hybrid word formed from the Latin ''spatium'', "space", and Greek ''nautes'', "sailor"). Apart from the Soviet Union, Europe has not yet produced manned spacecraft, but has sent men and women into space in cooperation with Russia and the United States.
'''Taikonaut''' is sometimes used in English for astronauts from China by Western news media. The term was coined in May 1998 by Chiew Lee Yih ( ) from Malaysia, who used it first in newsgroups. Almost simultaneously, Chen Lan coined it for use in the Western media based on the term ''t ik ng'' ( , literally "great emptiness"), Chinese for "space". In Chinese itself, however, a single term ''y h ng yu n'' ( , "universe navigator") has long been used for astronauts. The closest term using ''taikong'' is a colloquialism ''t ik ng r n'' ( , "space person"), which refers to people who have actually been in space. Official English texts issued by the Chinese government use ''astronaut'' ().
Space milestones
The first attempt ever in human history to use rocket for a spaceflight was done in the 16th century by a Chinese Ming dynasty official, a skilled stargazer named Wan Hu.sup sup This attempt was not successful.
The first cosmonaut was Yuri Gagarin, who was launched into space on April 12 1961 aboard Vostok 1. The first woman cosmonaut was Valentina Tereshkova, launched into space in June 1963 aboard Vostok 6. Alan Shepard became the first American in space in May 1961. Vladimir Remek became the first non Soviet European in space in 1978 on a Russian Soyuz rocket. On July 23 1980 Pham Tuan of Vietnam became the first Asian in space when he flew aboard Soyuz 37. Also in 1980, Arnaldo Tamayo M ndez became the first person of African descent to fly in space. (The first person born in Africa to fly in space was Patrick Baudry.) In June 1985 Shannon Lucid became the first Chinese born person in space. In 2002 Mark Shuttleworth became the first citizen of an African country to fly in space. On 15 October 2003 Yang Liwei became China's first astronaut on the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft. The first mission to orbit the moon was ''Apollo 8'' which included William Anders who was born in Hong Kong making him the first Asian born astronaut in 1968.
The youngest person to fly in space is Gherman Titov, who was roughly 26 years old when he flew Vostok 2, and the oldest is John Glenn who was 77 when he flew on STS 95. The longest stay in space was 438 days by Valeri Polyakov. As of 2005, the most spaceflights by an individual astronaut was seven, a record held by both Jerry L. Ross and Franklin Chang Diaz. The furthest distance from Earth an astronaut has traveled was 401056km (during the Apollo 13 emergency).
The first non governmental astronaut was Byron K. Lichtenberg, an MIT researcher who flew on Space Shuttle mission STS 9 in 1983. In December 1990, Toyohiro Akiyama became the first commercial space farer as a reporter for TBS who paid for his flight. The first self funded space tourist was Dennis Tito on 28 April 2001, while the first astronaut to fly on an entirely privately funded mission was Mike Melvill, on SpaceShipOne flight 15P, though this flight was sub orbital.
In the United States, persons selected as astronaut candidates receive silver Astronaut wings. Once they have flown in space they receive gold Astronaut wings. The United States Air Force also presents Astronaut wings to its pilots who exceed 50 miles (80 km) in altitude.
International astronauts
can be seen exercising in the foreground
Up until the end of the 1970s only Americans and Soviets were active astronauts. In 1976 the Soviets started the Intercosmos program with a first group of 6 cosmonauts from fellow Eastern Bloc countries and Cuba, a second group started training in 1978. At about the same time in 1978 the European Space Agency selected 4 astronauts to train for the first Spacelab mission on board of the Space Shuttle. In 1980 France started their own selection of astronauts, followed in 1982 by Germany, in 1983 by the Canadian space program, in 1985 by Japan and Italy in 1988. Several international payload specialists were selected for the Space Shuttle, and also later for international Soyuz missions of Russia. In 1998 the European Space Agency formed a single astronaut corps of 18 by dissolving the former national corps of France, Germany and Italy. The United Kingdom does not contribute to ESA's human spaceflight programme and so its citizens must receive training from either the United States or Russia if they wish to become astronauts.
Astronaut training
The first astronauts, both in the USA and USSR, tended to be jet fighter pilots, often test pilots, from military backgrounds. U.S. military astronauts receive a special qualification badge, known as the Astronaut Badge upon completion of Astronaut training and participation in a space flight.
Astronaut deaths
, commander of the Space Shuttle Challenger during the STS 51 L mission.
To date, eighteen astronauts have been killed on space missions, and at least ten more have been killed in ground based training accidents. ''See also: space disaster.''
Trivia
Many people who claim the Apollo moon landings were faked often call the astronauts ''astroNOTs''.
See also
List of astronauts by name
List of astronauts by selection
Timeline of astronauts by nationality
List of human spaceflights: 1961 1986, 1987 1999, 2000 present.
List of spacewalks and moonwalks
X 15
Spaceflight records
Shirley Thomas, author of ''Men of Space'' series (1960 1968)
External links
Category:Transportation occupations
Category:Science occupations
af:Ruimtevaarder
bg:
bn:
ca:Astronauta
cv:
cs:Kosmonaut
da:Astronaut
de:Raumfahrer
es:Astronauta
eo:Kosmona to
fr:Spationaute
id:Astronaut
it:Astronauta
he:
la:Astronauta
hu: rhaj s
nl:Ruimtevaarder
ja:
no:Astronaut
pl:Astronauta
pt:Astronauta
ru:
simple:Astronaut
sk:Kozmonaut
sl:Astronavt
fi:Astronautti
sv:Rymdfarare
th:
zh:
'''''A Modest Proposal: For Preventing the Children of Poor People in Ireland from Being a Burden to Their Parents or Country, and for Making Them Beneficial to the Publick''''', commonly referred to as '''''A Modest Proposal''''', is a satirical pamphlet written by Jonathan Swift in 1729. The work has now become one of the epitomes of satire, and the modern phrase "A modest proposal" derives from the work.
Theme
The work is written in first person point of view however, the narrator should not be confused with Swift himself, because the writer is merely a persona. He argues, through economic reasoning as well as a self righteous moral stance, for a way to turn the problem of squalor among the Catholics in Ireland into its own solution. His proposal is to fatten up the undernourished children and feed them to Ireland's rich land owners. Children of the poor could be sold into a meat market at the age of one thus combating overpopulation and unemployment, sparing families the expense of child rearing while providing them with a little extra income, improving the culinary experience of the wealthy, and contributing to the overall economic well being of the nation.
He offers statistical support for his assertions and gives specific data about the number of children to be sold, their weight and price, and the projected consumption patterns. He suggests some recipes for preparing this delicious new meat, and he feels sure that innovative cooks will be quick to generate more. He also anticipates that the practice of selling and eating children will have positive effects on family morality: husbands will treat their wives with more respect, and parents will value their children in ways hitherto unknown. His conclusion is that the implementation of this project will do more to solve Ireland's complex social, political, and economic problems than any other measure that has been proposed.
This is widely believed to be the greatest example of sustained irony in the history of the English language.
Reactions
The satirical intent of ''A Modest Proposal'' was misunderstood by many of Swift's peers, and he was harshly criticized for writing prose in such exceptionally "bad taste". He came close to losing his patronage because of this essay. The misunderstanding of the intent of the satirical attack came about largely because of the disparity between the satirical intent of the cannibalistic proposal and the sincere tone of the narrative voice.
Modern usage
In modern usage, the phrase "modest proposal" has come to indicate a proposal that is anything but modest. Such a 'proposal' may serve to advance a cause or argument, by promoting discussion on the merits of the argument's opposite.
Other examples of "modest proposals"
Report From Iron Mountain
Sokal Affair
Miscegenation (origin of the word)
Dihydrogen monoxide
Jack Thompson, attorney, has been criticised for writing an open letter similar to Swift's piece, one that included a promise of donating money to charity.
External links
from
Category:Satire
Modest Proposal, A
Modest Proposal, A
Modest Proposal, A
sv:Ett anspr ksl st f rslag
align "right" style "margin:0 0 1em 1em "
! Group
! 1
! Period
! 2
! 3
! 4
! 5
! 6
! 7
The '''alkali metals''' are the series of elements in Group 1 (IUPAC style) of the periodic table (excluding hydrogen in all but one rare circumstance): lithium ('''Li'''), sodium ('''Na'''), potassium ('''K'''), rubidium ('''Rb'''), caesium ('''Cs'''), and francium ('''Fr'''). They are all highly reactive and are never found in elemental form in nature.
The alkali metals are silver colored (caesium has a golden tinge), soft, low density metals, which react readily with halogens to form ionic salts, and with water to form strongly alkaline (basic) hydroxides. These elements all have one electron in their outermost shell, so the energetically preferred state of achieving a filled electron shell is to lose one electron to form a singly charged positive ion.
Hydrogen, with a solitary electron, is sometimes placed at the top of Group 1, but it is not an alkali metal (except under extreme circumstances as metallic hydrogen) rather it exists naturally as a diatomic gas. Removal of its single electron requires considerably more energy than removal of the outer electron for the alkali metals. As in the halogens, only one additional electron is required to fill in the outermost shell of the hydrogen atom, so hydrogen can in some circumstances behave like a halogen, forming the negative hydride ion. Binary compounds of hydride with the alkali metals and some transition metals have been prepared.
Under extremely high pressure, such as is found at the core of Jupiter, hydrogen does become metallic and behaves like an alkali metal see metallic hydrogen.
style "text align: center " border "1" cellpadding "2"
'''Explanation of above periodic table slice:'''
bgcolor "" Alkali metals
atomic number in font color "" font are solids
style "border: " solid borders are primordial elements (older than the Earth)
style "border: " dashed borders are naturally radioactive elements with no isotopes older than the Earth
! Category
Category:Alkali metals Category:Periodic table
! Interlanguage links
ar:
bg: 1
bs:Alkalni metali
ca:Metall alcal
da:Alkalimetal
de:Alkalimetalle
es:Alcalino
eo:Alkala metalo
eu:Metal alkalino
fr:M tal alcalin
gl:Alcalino
ko:
hr:Alkalijski metali
is:Alkal m lmur
it:Metalli alcalini
he:
la:Metallum alkalicum
lv:S rmu met li
lt: arminiai metalai
mk:
ms:Logam Alkali
nl:Alkalimetaal
ja: 1
no:Alkalimetall
nn:Alkalimetall
pl:Metale alkaliczne
pt:Alcalino met licos
ro:Metal alcalin
sk:Alkalick kovy
sl:Alkalijska kovina
sr:
fi:Alkalimetalli
sv:Alkalimetall
th:
vi:Kim lo i ki m
tr:Alkali metal
zh:
In logic, the '''argument form''' or ''test form'' of an argument results from replacing the different words, or sentences, that make up the argument with letters, along the lines of algebra the letters represent logical ''variables''. The ''sentence forms'' which classify argument forms of common arguments important are studied in college logic.
Here is an example of an argument:
'''A''' All humans are mortal. Socrates is human. ''Therefore'', Socrates is mortal.
We can rewrite argument A by putting each sentence on its own line:
'''B'''
:All humans are mortal.
:Socrates is human.
:''Therefore'', Socrates is mortal.
To demonstrate the important notion of the ''form'' of an argument, substitute letters for similar items throughout '''B''':
'''C'''
:All S are P.
:''a'' is S.
:''Therefore'', ''a'' is P.
All we have done in '''C''' is to put 'S' for 'human' and 'humans', 'P' for 'mortal', and '''a''' for 'Socrates' what results, '''C''', is the ''form'' of the original argument in '''A'''. So argument form '''C''' is the form of argument '''A'''. Moreover, each individual sentence of '''C''' is the ''sentence'' ''form'' of its respective sentence in '''A'''.
Attention is given to argument and sentence form, because ''form is what makes an argument valid or cogent''. Some examples of valid arguments forms are modus ponens, modus tollens, and the disjunctive syllogism. Two invalid argument forms are affirming the consequent and denying the antecedent.
See also
analytic proposition
synthetic proposition
Category:Logic
REDIRECT Allotropy
An '''alphabet''' is a complete standardized set of ''letters'' basic written symbols each of which roughly represents a phoneme of a spoken language, either as it exists now or as it may have been in the past. There are other systems of writing such as logograms, in which each symbol represents a morpheme, or word, and syllabaries, in which each symbol represents a syllable.
The word "alphabet" itself comes from alpha and beta, the first two symbols of the Greek alphabet. There are dozens of alphabets in use today. Most of them are 'linear', which means that they are made up of lines. Notable exceptions are the Braille alphabet, Morse code and the cuneiform alphabet of the ancient city of Ugarit.
Types
The term "alphabet" is currently used by linguists both in a wider and in a narrower sense. In the wider sense, the term refers to any script that is segmental on the phoneme level, i.e. that has separate glyphs for individual sounds and not for larger units such as syllables or words. In the narrower sense, some scholars distinguish true "alphabets" from two other subtypes, abjads and abugidas. The three types differ from each other in the way vowels are treated in relation to consonants. Abjads record only consonants and leave vowels (or most vowels) unexpressed in Abugidas the vowels are indicated by diacritical marks or systematic modification of the form of the consonants. In alphabets in the narrow sense, both consonants and vowels have separate symbols. The first alphabet in the wider sense was the Proto Canaanite alphabet, an abjad, which through its successor Phoenician became the ancestor of all later alphabets. The first alphabet in the narrow sense was the Greek alphabet.
Examples of present day abjads are the Arabic and Hebrew scripts true alphabets include Latin, Cyrillic, and Korean Hangul and abugidas are used to write Amharic, Hindi, and Thai. The Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics are also an abugida rather than a syllabary, as a glyph stands for a consonant and is rotated to represent the vowel, rather than each consonant vowel combination being represented by a separate glyph, as in a true syllabary.
The boundaries between these three types are not always clear cut. For example, Iraqi Kurdish is written in the Arabic script, which is normally an abjad. However, in Kurdish, writing the vowels is mandatory, and full letters are used, so the script is a true alphabet. Other languages may use a Semitic abjad with mandatory vowel diacritics, effectively making them abugidas. On the other hand, the Phagspa script of the Mongol Empire was based closely on the Tibetan abugida, but all vowel marks were written after the preceding consonant rather than as diacritic marks. Although short ''a'' was not written, as in the abugidas, one could argue that the linear arrangement made this a true alphabet. Conversely, the vowel marks of the Amharic abugida have been so completely assimilated into their consonants that the system is learned as a syllabary rather than as a segmental script. Even more extreme, the Pahlavi abjad became logographic. (See below.)
Thus the primary classification of alphabets reflects how they treat vowels. For tonal languages, further classification can be based on the treatment of tone, though there are as yet no names to distinguish the various types. Some alphabets disregard tone entirely, especially when it does not carry a heavy functional load, as in Somali and many other languages of Africa and the Americas. Such scripts are to tone what abjads are to vowels. Most commonly, tones are indicated with diacritics, the way vowels are treated in abugidas. This is the case for Vietnamese (a true alphabet) and Thai (an abugida). In Thai, tone is determined primarily by the choice of consonant, with diacritics for disambiguation. In the Pollard script (an abugida), vowels are indicated by diacritics, but the placement of the vowel relative to the consonant indicates the tone. More rarely, a script has separate letters for the tones, as is the case for Hmong and Zhuang. For many of these languages, regardless of whether letters or diacritics are used, the most common tone is not marked, just as the most common vowel is not marked in Indic abugidas.
Alphabets can be quite small. The Book Pahlavi script, an abjad, had only twelve letters at one point, and may have had even fewer later on. Today the Rotokas alphabet has only twelve letters. (The Hawaiian alphabet is sometimes claimed to be as small, but it actually consists of 18 letters, including the okina and five long vowels.) While Rotokas has a small alphabet because it has few phonemes to represent (just eleven), Book Pahlavi was small because many letters had been ''conflated'', that is, the graphic distinctions had been lost over time, and diacritics were not developed to compensate for this as they were in Arabic, another script that lost many of its distinct letter shapes. For example, a comma shaped letter represented ''g, d, y, k,'' and ''j''. However, such simplifications can perversely make a script more complicated. In later Pahlavi papyri, up to half of the remaining graphic distinctions were lost, and the script could no longer be read as a sequence of letters at all, but had to be learned as word symbols that is, as logograms like Egyptian Demotic.
The largest segmental script is probably an abugida, Devanagari. When written in Devanagari, Vedic Sanskrit has an alphabet of 53 letters, including the ''visarga'' mark for final aspiration and special letters for ''k '' and ''j '', though one of the letters is theoretical and not actually used. The Hindi alphabet must represent both Sanskrit and modern vocabulary, and so has been expanded to 58 with the ''khutma'' letters (letters with a dot added to represent sounds from Persian and English).
The largest known abjad is Sindhi, with 51 letters. The largest true alphabets include Kabardian and Abxaz (for Cyrillic), with 58 and 56 letters, respectively, and Slovak (for the Latin alphabet), with 46. However, these scripts either include di and tri graphs, similar to Spanish ''ch'', or diacritics, like Slovak '' ''. The largest true alphabet where each letter is graphically independent is probably Georgian, with 41 letters.
Syllabaries typically include 50 to 400 glyphs (though the M ra Pirah language of Brazil would require only 24 if tone were not indicated, and Rotokas 30), and the glyphs of logographic systems number from the hundreds to the thousands. Thus a simple count of the number of distinct symbols is an important clue to the nature of an unknown script.
It is not always clear what constitutes a distinct alphabet. French uses the same basic alphabet as English, but many of the letters can carry diacritic and other marks (for example, , or ). In French, these marks are not considered to create additional letters. However, in Icelandic, the accented letters (such as , and ) are considered distinct letters of the alphabet. Some adaptations of the Latin alphabet are augmented with ligatures, such as in Old English and in Algonquian by borrowings from other alphabets, such as the thorn in Old English and Icelandic, which came from the Futhark runes and by modifying existing letters, such as the eth of Old English and Icelandic, which came from ''d''. Other alphabets only use a subset of the Latin alphabet, such as Hawaiian, or Italian, which only uses the letters ''j'', ''k'', ''x'', ''y'' and ''w'' for foreign words.
Spelling
Each language may establish certain general rules that govern the association between letters and phonemes, but, depending on the language, these rules may or may not be consistently followed. In a perfectly phonological alphabet, the phonemes and letters would correspond perfectly in two directions: a writer could predict the spelling of a word given its pronunciation, and a speaker could predict the pronunciation of a word given its spelling. However, languages often evolve independently of their writing systems, and writing systems have been borrowed for languages they were not designed for, so the degree to which letters of an alphabet correspond to phonemes of a language varies greatly from one language to another and even within a single language.
Languages may fail to achieve a one to one correspondence between letters and sounds in any of several ways:
A language may represent a given phoneme with a combination of letters rather than just a single letter. Two letter combinations are called digraphs and three letter groups are called trigraphs. Kabardian uses a tesseragraph (four letters) for one of its phonemes.
A language may represent the same phoneme with two different letters or combinations of letters.
A language may spell some words with unpronounced letters that exist for historical or other reasons.
Pronunciation of individual words may change according to the presence of surrounding words in a sentence.
Different dialects of a language may use different phonemes for the same word.
A language may use different sets of symbols or different rules for distinct sets of vocabulary items (such as the Japanese hiragana and katakana syllabaries, or the various rules in English for spelling words from Latin and Greek, or the original Germanic vocabulary.
National languages generally elect to address the problem of dialects by simply associating the alphabet with the national standard. However, with an international language with wide variations in its dialects, such as English, it would be impossible to represent the language in all its variations with a single phonetic alphabet.
Some national languages like Finnish have a very regular spelling system with a nearly one to one correspondence between letters and phonemes. The Italian verb corresponding to 'spell', ''compitare'', is unknown to many Italians because the act of spelling itself is almost never needed: each phoneme of Standard Italian is represented in only one way. However, pronunciation cannot always be predicted from spelling because certain letters are pronounced in more than one way. In standard Spanish, it is possible to tell the pronunciation of a word from its spelling, but not vice versa this is because certain phonemes can be represented in more than one way, but a given letter is consistently pronounced. French, with its silent letters and its heavy use of nasal vowels and elision, may seem to lack much correspondence between spelling and pronunciation, but its rules on pronunciation are actually consistent and predictable with a fair degree of accuracy. At the other extreme, however, are languages such as English and Irish, where the spelling of many words simply has to be memorized as they do not correspond to sounds in a consistent way. For English, this is because the Great Vowel Shift occurred after the orthography was established, and because English has acquired a large number of loanwords at different times retaining their original spelling at varying levels. However, even English has general rules that predict pronunciation from spelling, and these rules are successful most of the time.
The sounds of speech of all languages of the world can be written by a rather small universal phonetic alphabet. A standard for this is the International Phonetic Alphabet.
Collation
An alphabet also serves to establish an ''order'' among letters that can be used for sorting entries in lists, called collating. Note that the order does not have to be constant among different languages using this alphabet for examples see Latin alphabet: Collating in other languages.
In recent years the Unicode initiative has attempted to collate most of the world's known writing systems into a single character encoding. As well as its primary purpose of standardising computer processing of non Roman scripts, the Unicode project has provided a focus for script related scholarship.
The Alphabet effect
Some communication theorists (notably those associated with the so called "Toronto school of communications", such as Marshall McLuhan, Harold Innis and more recently Robert K. Logan) have advanced hypotheses to the effect that alphabetic scripts in particular have served to promote and encourage the skills of analysis, coding, decoding, and classification. This set of hypotheses may be known as "the Alphabet effect", after the title of Logan's 1986 work.
The theory claims that a greater level of abstraction is required due to the greater economy of symbols in alphabetic systems and this abstraction needed to interpret phonemic symbols in turn has contributed in some way to the development of the societies which use it. Proponents of this theory hold that the development of alphabetic (as distinct to other types of) writing systems has made a significant impact on "Western" thinking and development because it introduced a new level of abstraction, analysis, and classification. McLuhan and Logan (1977) postulates that, as a result of these skills, the use of the alphabet created an environment conducive to the development of codified law, monotheism, abstract science, deductive logic, objective history, and individualism. According to Logan, "All of these innovations, including the alphabet, arose within the very narrow geographic zone between the Tigris Euphrates river system and the Aegean Sea, and within the very narrow time frame between 2000 B.C. and 500 B.C." (Logan 2004).
However, many of these abstractions first occurred in societies which did not use an alphabet, such as the codified law of Hammurabi in Babylonia, which predated similar codes in societies with the alphabet. Since the alphabet quickly spread to become nearly ubiquitous, it is difficult to trace cause and effect in this matter.
See also
Abecedarium
Abjad
Abugida
Akshara
Alphabetical order
Alphabets derived from the Latin
Artificial scripts
Character set
Lipogram
List of alphabets
Syllabary
Transliteration
Unicode
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
References
Overview of modern and some ancient writing systems.
Chapter 3 traces and summarizes the invention of alphabetic writing.
McLuhan, Marshall Logan, Robert K. (1977). Alphabet, Mother of Invention. Etcetera. Vol. 34, pp. 373 383.
Chapter 4 traces the invention of writing.
External links
Michael Everson's
The
animation by Prof. Robert Fradkin at the University of Maryland
Category:Alphabetic writing systems
Category:Documents
Category:Writing
af:Alfabet
als:Alphabet
ar:
ast:Alfabetu
be:
bg:
br:Lizherenneg
ca:Alfabet
cv:
cs:Abeceda
da:Alfabet
de:Alphabet
et:T hestik
es:Alfabeto
eo:Alfabetoj
eu:Alfabeto
fr:Alphabet
gl:Alfabeto
id:Alfabet
it:Alfabeto
he:
ka:
ko:
ku:Alfabe
kw:Lytherennek
la:abecedarium
lad:Alefbet
lv:Alfab ts
lt:Ab c l
hu: b c
ms:Aksara
nl:Alfabet
ja:
no:Alfabet
nn:Alfabet
pl:Alfabet
pt:Alfabeto
ro:Alfabet
ru:
sq:Alfabeti
simple:Alphabet
sk:Abeceda
sl:Abeceda
fi:Aakkoset
sv:Alfabet
tl:Alpabeto
th:
tr:Abece
uk:
zh:
In chemistry and physics, the '''atomic number''' ('''Z''') is the number of protons found in the nucleus of an atom. In an atom of neutral charge, the number of electrons ''also'' equals the atomic number.
The atomic number originally meant the number of an element's place in the periodic table. When Mendeleyev arranged the known chemical elements grouped by their similarities in chemistry, it was noticeable that placing them in strict order of atomic mass resulted in some mismatches. Iodine and tellurium, if listed by atomic mass, appeared to be in the wrong order, and would fit better if their places in the table were swapped. Placing them in the order which fit chemical properties most closely, their number in the table was their atomic number. This number appeared to be approximately proportional to the mass of the atom, but, as the discrepancy showed, reflected some other property than mass.
The anomalies in this sequence were finally explained after research by Henry Gwyn Jeffreys Moseley in 1913. Moseley discovered a strict relationship between the x ray diffraction spectra of elements, and their correct location in the periodic table. It was later shown that the atomic number corresponds to the electric charge of the nucleus in other words the number of protons. It is the charge which gives elements their chemical properties, rather than the atomic mass.
The atomic number is closely related to the mass number (although they should not be confused) which is the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. The mass number often comes after the name of the element, e.g. carbon 14 (used in carbon dating).
See also
Periodic table
List of elements by number
Effective atomic number
! Categories
Category:Chemical properties
Category:Nuclear physics
! Interwiki
af:Atoomgetal
als:Ordnungszahl
ar:
ast:N mberu at micu
bg:
bs:Atomski broj
br:Niver atomek
ca:Nombre at mic
cs:Atomov slo
da:Atomnummer
de:Ordnungszahl
et:J rjenumber
es:N mero at mico
eo:Atomnumero
fr:Num ro atomique
gl:N mero At mico
ko:
hr:Atomski broj
io:Atomala nombro
id:Nomor atom
is:S tistala
it:Numero atomico
he:
lt:Atomo numeris
nl:Atoomnummer
ja:
no:Atomnummer
nn:Atomnummer
pl:Liczba atomowa
pt:N mero at mico
ro:Num r atomic
ru:
simple:Atomic number
sk:Prot nov slo
sl:Vrstno tevilo
sr:
fi:J rjestysluku (kemia)
sv:Atomnummer
th:
tr:Atom numaras
uk:
zh:
''.
'', 1728
'''Anatomy''' (from the Greek '' anatomia'', from '' anatemnein'', to cut up, cut open), is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). Furthermore, anatomy can be covered either regionally or systemically, that is, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest for the former, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systmes for the latter. Major branches of anatomy include comparative anatomy, histology, and human anatomy.
Animal anatomy
Animal anatomy may include the study of the structure of different animals, when it is called comparative anatomy or animal morphology, or it may be limited to one animal only, in which case it is spoken of as ''special anatomy''.
Human anatomy
From a utilitarian point of view the study of humans is the most important division of special anatomy, and this human anatomy may be approached from different points of view.
From that of Medicine it consists of a knowledge of the exact form, position, size and relationship of the various structures of the healthy human body, and to this study the term descriptive or topographical human anatomy is given, though it is often, less happily, spoken of as ''anthropotomy''.
So intricate is the human body that only a small number of professional human anatomists, after years of patient observation, are complete masters of all its details most of them specialize on certain parts, such as the brain or viscera, contenting themselves with a good working knowledge of the rest.
''Topographical anatomy'' must be learned by repeated dissection and inspection of dead human bodies.
It is no more a science than a pilot's knowledge is, and, like that knowledge, must be exact and available in moments of emergency.
From the morphological point of view, however, human anatomy is a scientific and fascinating study, having for its object the discovery of the causes which have brought about the existing structure of humans, and needing a knowledge of the allied sciences of embryology or developmental biology, phylogeny, and histology.
''Pathological anatomy'' (or ''morbid anatomy'') is the study of diseased organs, while sections of normal anatomy, applied to various purposes, receive special names such as medical, surgical, gynaecological, artistic and superficial anatomy.
The comparison of the anatomy of different races of humans is part of the science of physical anthropology or anthropological anatomy.
In the present edition of this work the subject of anatomy is treated systematically rather than topographically.
Each anatomical article contains first a description of the structures of an organ or system (such as nerves, arteries, heart, and so forth), as it is found in humans this is followed by an account of the development (embryology) and comparative anatomy (morphology), as far as vertebrate animals are concerned but only those parts of the lower animals which are of interest in explaining human body structure are here dealt with.
The articles have a twofold purpose first, to give enough details of structure to make the articles on physiology, surgery, medicine and pathology intelligible and, secondly, to give the non expert inquirer, or the worker in some other branch of science, the chief theories on which the modern scientific groundwork of anatomy is built.
Major body systems
Circulatory system
Digestive system
Endocrine system
Excretory system
Immune system
Integumentary system
Lymphatic system
Muscular system
Nervous system
Reproductive system
Respiratory system
Skeletal system (Human skeleton)
Organs
Anus
Appendix
Brain
Breast
Colon or large intestine
Diaphragm
Ear
Eye
Heart
Kidney
Labia
Larynx
Liver
Lung
Nose
Ovary
Pharynx
Pancreas
Penis
Placenta
Rectum
Skin
Small intestine
Spleen
Stomach
Tongue
Uterus
Bones in the human skeleton
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Humerus
Mandible
Patella
Radius
Skull (cranium)
Tibia
Ulna
Rib (costa)
Vertebrae
Pelvis
Sternum
Glands
Ductless gland
Mammary gland
Salivary gland
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid gland
Adrenal gland
Pituitary gland
Pineal gland
Tissues
Connective tissue
Endothelial tissue
Epithelial tissue
Glandular tissue
Lymphoid tissue
Externally visible parts of the human body
Abdomen
Arm
Back
Buttock
Chest
Ear
Eye
Face
Genitals
Head
Joint
Leg
Mouth
Neck
Scalp
Skin
Teeth
Tongue
Other anatomic terms (not classified)
Artery
Coelom
Diaphragm
Gastrointestinal tract
Hair
Exoskeleton
Lip
Nerve
Peritoneum
Serous membrane
Skeleton
Skull
Spinal cord
Vein
See also
List of anatomical topics
List of human anatomical features
Important publications in anatomy
History of anatomy
Human anatomy
Organ (anatomy)
Superficial anatomy
Zootomical terms for location
External links
http: immunity info.net
Category:Anatomy
be:
bg:
bs:Anatomija
ca:Anatomia
cs:Anatomie
cy:Anatomeg
da:Anatomi
de:Anatomie
eo:Anatomio
es:Anatom a
et:Anatoomia
eu:Anatomia
fa:
fi:Anatomia
fr:Anatomie
fy:Anatomy
he:
ia:Anatomia
id:Anatomi
io:Anatomio
is:L ff rafr i
it:Anatomia
ja:
ko:
ku:Anatom
la:Anatomia
lt:Anatomija
mk:
nds:Anatomie
nl:Anatomie
no:Anatomi
os:
pl:Anatomia
pt:Anatomia
ru:
scn:Anatum a
simple:Anatomy
sk:Anat mia
sl:Anatomija
sr:
su:Anatomi
sv:Anatomi
th:
tl:Anatomiya
tr:Anatomi
uk:
vi:Gi i ph u h c
zh:
'''Affirming the consequent''' is a logical fallacy in the form of a hypothetical proposition. Propositionally speaking, Affirming the Consequent is the logical equivalent of assuming the converse of a statement to be true. The fallacy of affirming the consequent occurs when a hypothetical proposition comprising an antecedent and a consequent asserts that the truthhood of the consequent implies the truthhood of the antecedent. This is fallacious because it assumes a bidirectionality when it does not necessarily exist.
This fallacy has the following argument form:
:If P, then Q.
:Q.
:Therefore, P.
This logical error is called the fallacy of affirming the consequent because it is mistakenly concluded from the second premise that the affirmation of the consequent entails the truthhood of the antecedent. One way to demonstrate the invalidity is to use a counterexample. Here is an argument that is obviously incorrect:
:If Stephen King wrote the Bible (P), then Stephen King is a good writer (Q).
:Stephen King is a good writer (Q).
:Therefore, Stephen King wrote the Bible (P).
The previous argument was obviously incorrect, but the next argument may be more deceiving:
:If someone is human (P), then she is mortal (Q).
:Anna is mortal (Q).
:Therefore Anna is human (P).
But in fact Anna can be a cat very much a mortal, but not a human one.
However, be aware that a similar argument form is valid in which the first premise asserts "if and only if" rather than "if". Similarly, the converse of a statement can be validly assumed to be true so long as the "if and only if" phrase is attached.
See also
Modus ponens
Modus tollens
Denying the antecedent
Fallacy of the undistributed middle
Category:Logical fallacies
he: D7 90 D7 99 D7 A9 D7 95 D7 A8 D7 94 D7 A1 D7 95 D7 92 D7 A8
tl:pinapatibayan ang kasunod
'''Andrei Arsenyevich Tarkovsky''' ( ) (April 4, 1932 December 28, 1986) was a Russian movie director, writer, and actor. He is regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers of the Soviet era in Russia and one of the greatest in the history of cinema.
Biography
Tarkovsky, son of the prominent poet Arseniy Tarkovsky, was a product of the golden era of Soviet arts education. He received a classical education in Moscow, studying Music and Arabic, before training for over five years at the VGIK film school, studying directly under Mikhail Romm among others.
He also worked as a geologist in Siberia.
Although the Orthodox Christian symbolism of his films led to prevarication and occasional suppression of the finished product by the Soviet authorities, the Soviet Mosfilm studio system enabled him to make films that would not have been commercially viable in the West. However, Tarkovsky's principal complaint about his treatment by the authorities was that he had many more ideas in him than he was allowed to bring to the screen, and in 1984, after shooting ''Nostalghia'' in Italy, he decided not to return to Russia. He made only one more film, ''The Sacrifice'', a European co production filmed in Sweden, before dying of cancer in the suburb of Paris at the early age of 54.
Andrei Tarkovsky was buried in a graveyard for Russian migr s in the town of Sainte Genevi ve des Bois, le de France, France.
Work
Tarkovsky's films are characterised by metaphysical themes, extremely long takes, and memorable images of exceptional beauty. Recurring motifs in his films are dreams, memory, childhood, running water accompanied by fire, rain indoors, reflections, and characters re appearing in the foreground of long panning movements of the camera.
Tarkovsky developed a theory of cinema that he called "sculpting in time". By this he meant that the unique characteristic of cinema as a medium was to take our experience of time and alter it. Unedited movie footage transcribes time in real time. (The speedy jump cutting style that is prevalent in MTV videos and Hollywood movies, by contrast, overrides any sense of time by imposing the editor's viewpoint.) By using long takes and few cuts in his films, he aimed to give the viewers a sense of time passing, time lost, and the relationship of one moment in time to another.
Up to and including his film Mirror, Tarkovsky focused his cinematic works on exploring this theory. After Mirror, he announced that he would focus his work on exploring the dramatic unities proposed by Aristotle: a concentrated action, happening in one place, within the span of a single day. The Sacrifice is the only film that truly reflects this ambition it is also considered by many to be a near perfect reflection of the sculpting in time theory.
Filmography
''The Killers'' (1958) Tarkovsky's first student film at VGIK, the Soviet State Film School.
''Concentrate'' (1958) Tarkovsky's second student film at VGIK, the Soviet State Film School.
''There Will be No Leave Today'' (1959) Tarkovsky's final student film at VGIK, the Soviet State Film School.
''The Steamroller and the Violin'' (1960) Tarkovsky's graduation film from VGIK, the Soviet State Film School, cowritten with Andrei Konchalovsky.
''My Name is Ivan Ivan's Childhood'' (1962) Winner of Golden Lion for "Best Film" at 1962 Venice Film Festival. Set in the Second World War, this is Tarkovsky's most conventional feature film, although it still has moments of lyrical beauty.
''Andrei Rublev'' (1966) An epic based on the life of Andrei Rublev, the most famous medieval Russian painter of icons.
''Solaris'' (1972) based on the science fiction novel by Stanis aw Lem.
''Mirror'' (1975) A loosely autobiographical reconstruction of key scenes in Tarkovsky's life, the film he'd tried to make earlier but abandoned for ''Solaris'' (we can note thematic ties between them). Said by Tarkovsky to be closest to his own vision of cinema.
''Stalker'' (1979) inspired by the novel ''Roadside Picnic'' by Boris and Arkady Strugatsky.
''Tempo di Viaggio Italian Journey'' (1982) a documentary made for Italian television while scouting locations for Nostalghia with Italian co writer (and frequent screenwriter for Michelangelo Antonioni) .
''Nostalghia'' (1983) A Russian scholar retraces the footsteps of an 18th century Russian composer in Italy. An encounter with a local lunatic a man who believes he can save humanity by carrying a lit candle across an empty swimming pool crystalizes the poet's melancholic sense of longing for his family, faith, and homeland.
''The Sacrifice'' (1986) The film is about the prospect of nuclear annihilation and man's spiritual response to this and other dilemmas set in counterpoint to a minor fable of failed adultery.
Bibliography
''Sculpting in Time : Reflections on the Cinema'', translated by Kitty Hunter Blair (1987)
''Time Within Time: The Diaries 1970 1986'', translated by Kitty Hunter Blair (1993)
External links
Tarkovsky, Andrei
Tarkovsky, Andrei
Tarkovsky, Andrei
Tarkovsky, Andrei
ca:Andrei Tarkovski
cs:Andrej Tarkovskij
da:Andrei Tarkovsky
de:Andrei Arsenjewitsch Tarkowski
et:Andrei Tarkovski
es:Andrei Tarkovsky
fa:
fr:Andre Tarkovski
it:Andrej Tarkovskij
he:
hu:Andrej Tarkovszkij
nl:Andrej Tarkovski
ja:
no:Andrej Tarkovskij
pl:Andriej Tarkowski
pt:Andrei Tarkovski
ro:Andrei Tarkovski
ru: ,
fi:Andrei Tarkovski
sv:Andrej Tarkovskij
tr:Andrei Arsenyevich Tarkovsky
"This word has many meanings..." D nal Troddyn, A Treatise on Language Vol. 2, 2004
A word, phrase, sentence, or other communication is called '''ambiguous''' if it can be interpreted in more than one way. Ambiguity is distinct from ''vagueness'', which arises when the boundaries of meaning are indistinct.
'''Lexical ambiguity''' arises when context is insufficient to determine the sense of a single word that has more than one meaning. For example, the word "bank" has several meanings, including "financial institution" and "edge of a river", but if someone says "I deposited 100 in the bank", the intended meaning is clear. More problematic are words whose senses express closely related concepts. "Good", for example, can mean "useful" or "functional" (''That's a good hammer''), "exemplary" (''She's a good student''), "pleasing" (''This is good soup''), "moral" (''He is a good person''), and probably other similar things. "I have a good daughter" isn't clear about which sense is intended.
'''Syntactic ambiguity''' arises when a sentence can be parsed in more than one way. "He ate the cookies on the couch", for example, could mean that he ate those cookies which were on the couch (as opposed to those that were on the table), or it could mean that he was sitting on the couch when he ate the cookies. Spoken language can also contain lexical ambiguities, where there is more than one way to break up a set of sounds into words, for example "ice cream" and "I scream". This is rarely a problem due to the use of context.
Philosophers (and other users of logic) spend a lot of time and effort searching for and removing ambiguity in arguments, because it can lead to incorrect conclusions and can be used to deliberately conceal bad arguments. For example, a politician might say "I oppose taxes which hinder economic growth". Some will think he opposes taxes in general because they hinder economic growth others will think he opposes only those taxes that he believes will hinder economic growth (although in writing, the correct insertion or omission of a comma after "taxes" removes ambiguity here). The politician hopes that each will interpret the statement in the way he wants, and both will think the politician is on his side. The logical fallacies of amphiboly and equivocation also rely on the use of ambiguous words and phrases.
In literature and rhetoric, on the other hand, ambiguity can be a useful tool. Groucho Marx's classic joke depends on a grammatical ambiguity for its humor, for example: ''Last night I shot an elephant in my pajamas. What he was doing in my pajamas I'll never know.'' Songs and poetry often rely on ambiguous words for artistic effect, as in the song title "Don't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue" (where "blue" can refer to the color, or to sadness).
In narrative, ambiguty can be introduced in several ways: motive, plot, character. F. Scott Fitzgerald uses the latter type of ambiguity with notable effect in his novel The Great Gatsby.
In music pieces or sections which confound expectations and may be or are interpreted simultaneously in different ways are ambiguous, such as some polytonality, polymeter, other ambiguous meters or rhythms, and ambiguous phrasing, or (Stein 2005, p.79) any aspect of music. The music of Africa is often purposely ambiguous. To quote Sir Donald Francis Tovey (1935, p.195), "Theorists are apt to vex themselves with vain efforts to remove uncertainty just where it has a high aesthetic value."
Some languages have been created with the intention of avoiding ambiguity, especially syntactic ambiguity. Lojban and Loglan are two nearly identical languages which have been created with the intention of being clear and impossible to misunderstand. The languages can be both spoken and written. Their unambiguity makes them better suited than natural languages for use in communication between humans and computers.
See also
double entendre
imprecise language
logical fallacy
semantics
External links
Category:Semantics
de:Mehrdeutigkeit
nl:Ambigu teit
The word '''animal''' when used alone has several possible meanings in the English language. It could refer to:
A taxonomic member of the Kingdom Animalia, an animal.
A British rock band called The Animals.
An album released by British rock band Pink Floyd called ''Animals''.
A 2001 film starring Rob Schneider called ''The Animal''.
A genre of anime.
A Muppet Show character: see Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem.
A professional wrestler: see Joseph Laurinaitis.
A video game by Microtime called Animal.
Animal is the name of several songs.
For all English languange meanings, see the .
de:Animals
hu:Animals
Taxobox
color pink
name Aardvark
status
image Erdferkel drawing.jpg
image width 200px
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis Mammalia
ordo '''Tubulidentata'''
ordo authority Huxley, 1872
familia '''Orycteropodidae'''
familia authority Gray, 1821
genus '''''Orycteropus'''''
genus authority . Geoffroy Saint Hilaire, 1796
species '''''O. afer'''''
binomial ''Orycteropus afer''
binomial authority Pallas, 1766
The '''Aardvark''' (''Orycteropus afer'') is a medium sized mammal native to Africa. The name comes from the Afrikaans Dutch for "earth pig" (''aarde'' earth, ''varken'' pig), because early settlers from Europe thought it resembled a pig (although Aardvarks are not closely related to pigs).
The Aardvark is the only surviving member of the family '''Orycteropodidae''' and of the order '''Tubulidentata'''. The Aardvark was originally placed in the same genus as the South American anteaters because of superficial similarities which, it is now known, are the result of convergent evolution, not common ancestry. (For the same reason, Aardvarks bear a striking first glance resemblance to the marsupial bilbies and bandicoots of Australasia, which are not placental mammals at all.)
The oldest known Tubulidentata fossils have been found in Kenya and date to the early Miocene. Although the relationships of Tubulidentata are unknown, they are probably Ungulates. They spread to Europe and southern Asia during the later Miocene and early Pliocene periods. Three genera of the family Orycteropodidae are known: ''Leptorycteropus'', ''Myorycteropus'', and ''Orycteropus'', the surviving Aardvark. A genus from Madagascar may be related to them, called ''Plesiorycteropus''.
The most distinctive characteristic of the Tubulidentata is (as the name implies) their teeth which, instead of having a pulp cavity, have lots of thin tubes of dentine, each containing pulp and held together by cementum. The teeth have no enamel coating and are worn away and regrow continuously. Aardvarks are born with conventional incisors and canines at the front of the jaw, but these fall out and are not replaced. In adult Aardvarks, the only teeth are the molars at the back of the jaw.
Aardvarks are only vaguely pig like the body is stout with an arched back the limbs are of moderate length. The front feet have lost the pollex (or 'thumb')resulting in four toesbut the rear feet have all five toes. Each toe bears a large, robust nail which is somewhat flattened and shovel like, and appears to be intermediate between a claw and a hoof. The ears are disproportionately long and the tail very thick at the base with a gradual taper. The greatly elongated head is set on a short, thick neck, and at the end of the snout is a disk in which the nostrils open. The mouth is typical of species that feed on termites: small and tubular. Aardvarks have long, thin, protrusible tongues and elaborate structures supporting a keen sense of smell.
Weight is typically between 40 and 65 kg length is usually between 1 and 1.3 m. Aardvarks are a pale yellowish gray in color, often stained reddish brown by soil. The coat is thin and the animal's primary protection is its tough skin Aardvarks have been known to sleep in a recently excavated ant nest, so well does it protect them.
In the past, several individual species of Aardvark were named, however current knowledge indicates that there is only one species, ''Orycteropus afer'', with several subspecies 18 have been listed but most are regarded as invalid.
Aardvarks are nocturnal and solitary creatures that feed almost exclusively on ants and termites. An Aardvark emerges from its burrow in the late afternoon or shortly after sunset, and forages over a considerable home range, swinging its long nose from side to side to pick up the scent of food. When a concentration of ants or termites is found, the Aardvark digs into it with its powerful front legs, keeping its long ears upright to listen for predators, and takes up an astonishing number of insects with its long, sticky tongueas many as 50,000 in one night has been recorded. They are exceptionally fast diggers, but otherwise move rather slowly.
Aside from digging out ants and termites, aardvarks also excavate burrows to live in: temporary sites scattered around the home range as refuges, and the main burrow which is used for breeding. Main burrows can be deep and extensive, have several entrances, and be 13m long. Aardvarks change the layout of their home burrow regularly, and from time to time move on and make a new one. Only mothers and young share burrows.
After a gestation period of 7 months, a single young weighing around 2 kg is born, and is able to leave the burrow to accompany its mother after only two weeks. At six months of age it is digging its own burrows, but it will often remain with the mother until the next mating season. Aardvarks can grow older than 20 years in captivity.
Aardvarks are distributed across most of sub Saharan Africa, and although killed by humans both for their flesh and for their teeth (which are used as decorations), do not appear to be threatened.
''Aardvark'' is always the first noun in the English dictionary.
More precise information are given in a diploma thesis on the biology of the aardvark which can be downloaded here: http: en.wikisource.org wiki Image:Aardvark.pdf '''The Biology of the Aardvark''' (''Orycteropus afer'')
Similar animals
The anteaters of South America.
Pangolins are also called ''scaly anteaters''.
The Numbat (''Myrmecobius fasciatus''), a marsupial.
Echidnas, a family of monotremes, are still sometimes called ''spinous anteaters''.
Armadillos are omnivorous but ants form a large part of their diet.
Category:Dutch loanwords
Category:Mammals
Category:Wildlife of Africa
cs:Hrab
da:Jordsvin
de:Erdferkel
et:Tuhnik
es:Cerdo hormiguero
eo:Orikteropo
fr:Oryct rope du Cap
he:
sw:Mhanga
lt:Vamzd iadan iai
li:Eerdverke
nl:Aardvarken
no:Jordsvin
ja:
pl:Mr wnik
pt:Oricterope
ru:
simple:Aardvark
sv:Jordsvin
taxobox
color pink
name Aardwolf
status
image Aardwolf.png
image width 235px
image caption Aardwolf
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis Mammalia
ordo Carnivora
familia Hyaenidae
genus '''''Proteles'''''
species '''''P. cristatus'''''
binomial ''Proteles cristatus''
binomial authority Sparrman 1783
The '''Aardwolf''' (''Proteles cristatus'') is a small mammal related to the Hyena, native to Africa. The name means "earth wolf" in Afrikaans.
There are two subspecies:
''Proteles cristatus cristatus'' (Southern Africa)
''Proteles cristatus septentrionalis'' (East Africa)
The Aardwolf looks most like the Striped Hyena but smaller with a more pointed muzzle, sharper ears, vertical stripes, and a long mane down the middle line of the neck and back. It stands about 50 cm at the shoulder, weighs around 9 kg, and has two glands at the rear that secrete a musky fluid for marking territory and communicating with other aardwolves.
, Texas
The Aardwolf is nocturnal, sleeping in underground burrows by day. By night, an Aardwolf can consume up to 200,000 harvester termites. They are also known to feed on other insects, larvae, and eggs.
While primarily solitary, a mating pair will occupy the same territory with their young. Gestation lasts between 90 and 100 days. The first six to eight weeks are spent in the den with the mother. After three months, they begin supervised foraging and set off on their own shortly thereafter.
External links
Category:Hyenas
Category:Wildlife of Africa
bg:
da:Jordulv
de:Erdwolf
es:Lobo de tierra
eo:Protelo
it:Proteles cristatus
he: ( )
nl:Aardwolf
no:Jordulv
pt:Proteles cristatus
'''Adobe''' is a building material composed of water, sandy clay and straw or other organic materials, which is shaped into bricks using wooden frames and dried in the sun, also known as Mudbrick . Adobe structures are extremely durable and account for the oldest extant buildings on the planet. Adobe buildings also offer significant advantages in hot, dry climates, as they remain cooler as it stores and releases heat very slowly.
The word "adobe" is Spanish and comes from the Arabic "at tub", the brick, and from the Coptic "tObe". The word may be pronounced ah doh beh or uh doh bee. Buildings made of sun dried earth are common in the Middle East, North Africa, and in Spain (usually in the Mudejar style). The method of brickmaking was imported to the Americas in the 16th century by Spaniards.
A distinction is sometimes made between the smaller ''adobes,'' which are about the size of ordinary baked bricks, and the larger ''adobines,'' some of which are as much as from one to two yards long.
In more modern usage, the term "adobe" has come to mean a style of architecture that is popular in the desert climates of North America, especially in New Mexico. Cf. stucco.
Composition of adobe
An adobe brick is made of soil mixed with water and an organic material such as straw or animal dung. The soil composition typically contains clay and sand. Straw is useful in binding the brick together and allowing the brick to dry evenly. Dung offers the same advantage and is also added to repel insects.
Adobe bricks
Bricks are made in an open frame, 25 cm (10 inches) by 36 cm (14 inches) is a reasonable size, but any convenient size is fine for your own use. After the mud is put into the frame the frame is removed. After a few hours the bricks are put on edge to finish drying. Bricks should be dried in the shade to avoid cracking.
Use the same mixture you use to make bricks for mortar when laying the bricks and for plaster on the interior and exterior walls. Some ancient cultures used concrete for the plaster to avoid rain damage. It is sometimes useful to include occasional pieces of wood as you lay a wall to give something to nail insulation onto, and stone can be used for additional strength.
The largest structure ever made from adobe (bricks), was the Bam Citadel, which suffered serious damage, up to 80 , by an earthquake on December 26, 2003. Other large adobe structures are the Huaca del Sol in Peru, built using 100 million signed bricks, and the ciudellas of Chan Chan, also in Peru.
Thermal properties
Because an adobe wall, either made of bricks or using a rammed earth technique, is quite massive it will hold heat or cold. A south facing adobe wall may be left uninsulated in order to collect heat during the day. It should be thick enough that it remains cool on the inside during the heat of the day but should be thin enough that the heat can be transferred through the wall by evening. Such a wall can be covered with glass to increase heat collection. Used in a passive solar home, such a wall is called a Trombe wall. Adobe has a large thermal mass, therefore this type of construction is only good in tropical climates. In temperate climates it is almost impossible to heat a home of this type as the heat is leached by the ground and the walls.
Around the world
gallery
Image:RomaniaDanubeDelta MakingMaterialForCOnstructing0003jpg.JPG Still in production today, Danube Delta
Image:RomaniaDanubeDelta MakingMaterialForCOnstructing0002jpg.JPG
Image:RomaniaDanubeDelta MakingMaterialForCOnstructing0001jpg.JPG
Image:RomaniaDanubeDelta MakingMaterialForCOnstructing0004jpg.JPG
gallery
''See also'' Hassan Fathy, mudbrick
External links
A website whose focus is contemporary issues in earth architecture.
has developed a patented system called Superadobe, in which bags filled with stabilized earth are layered with strands of barbed wire to form a structure strong enough to withstand earthquakes, fire and flood.
Category:Materials
Category:Masonry
:Category:Appropriate technology
Category:Arabic words
ar: ( )
cs:Adobe (stavebnictv )
de:Adobe (Ziegel)
es:Adobe (construcci n)
eo:Adobo
fr:Adobe (brique)
hu:V lyog
pl:Adobe (budownictwo)
pt:Adobe
tr:Kerpi
:''For other uses, see Adventure (disambiguation).''
'''Adventure''' refers to events which happen unexpectedly and involve the chance of danger or loss. Adventures can include daring feats, remarkable occurrences, stirring encounters, and major life undertakings.
Adventurous experiences create psychological and physiological arousal which can be interpreted as negative (e.g., fear) or positive (e.g., flow) (see Yerkes Dodson law). For some people, adventure becomes a major pursuit in and of itself, for example see Extreme Sports.
Applications of Adventure
Adventure is a term used in many contexts and situations. For example, it is a key component of narrative, story telling, drama and role playing and the concept is used to structure and interpet books, films, music and computer games. Adventure is also used within education, sport, tourism and others forms of entertainment. Examples of these adventure genres and applications include:
Adventure education is the use of challenging experiences for learning.
Adventure film is a film genre.
Adventure game is a computer game genre.
Adventure novel is a fiction genre.
Adventure (role playing games) involve acting out a specific storyline or plotline.
Adventure racing involves competing in multiple outdoor adventure extreme sports.
Adventure tourism offers travellers chances to have exciting travel encounters.
See also
Risk
de:Abenteuer
es:Aventura
fr:Aventure
sv: ventyrsspel
REDIRECT Pope Agatho
:''For the queen of Greek mythology, see Agave (mythology).''
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name ''Agave''
image Agave americana a m.jpg
image width 250px
image caption Century plant
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Liliopsida
ordo Asparagales
familia Agavaceae
genus '''''Agave'''''
genus authority L.
subdivision ranks Species
subdivision
''Agave americana''br
''Agave fourcroydes''br
''Agave sisalana''br
many others, see text
'''Agaves''' are succulent plants of a large botanical genus of the same name, belonging to the family Agavaceae. Chiefly Mexican, they occur also in the southern and western United States and in central and tropical South America. The plants have a large rosette of thick fleshy leaves generally ending in a sharp point and with a spiny margin the stout stem is usually short, the leaves apparently springing from the root.
Each rosette is monocarpic and grows slowly to flower but once after a number of years, when a tall stem or "mast" grows from the center of the leaf rosette and bears a large number of shortly tubular flowers. After development of fruit the original plant dies, but suckers are frequently produced from the base of the stem which become new plants.
The most familiar species is ''Agave americana'', a native of tropical America, the so called Century Plant or American aloe (the maguey of Mexico). The name refers to the long time the plant takes to flower, although the number of years before flowering occurs depends on the vigor of the individual, the richness of the soil and the climate during these years the plant is storing in its fleshy leaves the nourishment required for the effort of flowering. During the development of the inflorescence there is a rush of sap to the base of the young flowerstalk. In the case of ''A. americana'' and other species this is used by the Mexicans to make their national beverage, pulque the flower shoot is cut out and the sap collected and subsequently fermented. By distillation a spirit called mezcal is prepared. The leaves of several species yield fiber, as for instance, ''Agave rigida var. sisalana'', sisal hemp, ''Agave decipiens'', False Sisal Hemp ''Agave americana'' is the source of pita fiber, and is used as a fiber plant in Mexico, the West Indies and southern Europe. The flowering stem of the last named, dried and cut in slices, forms natural razor strops, and the expressed juice of the leaves will lather in water like soap. The Native Americans of Mexico used the agave both to make pens, nails and needles as well as string to sew and make weavings. In India the plant is extensively used for hedges along railroads.
''Agave americana'', century plant, was introduced into Europe about the middle of the 16th century and is now widely cultivated for its handsome appearance in the variegated forms the leaf has a white or yellow marginal or central stripe from base to apex. As the leaves unfold from the center of the rosette the impression of the marginal spines is very conspicuous on the still erect younger leaves. The tequ plants are usually grown in tubs and put out in the summer months, but in the winter require protection from frost. They mature very slowly and die after flowering, but are easily propagated by the offsets from the base of the stem.
Agave nectar has been used as an alternative to sugar in cooking.
The juice from many species of agave can cause acute contact dermatitis. It will produce reddening and blistering lasting one to two weeks. Episodes of itching may recur up to a year thereafter, even though there is no longer a visible rash. Interestingly, dried parts of the plants can be handled with bare hands with little or no effect.
Taxonomy
Agaves were once classified in Liliaceae but most references now include them in their own family, Agavaceae.
Agaves have long presented special difficulties for taxonomy variations within a species may be considerable, and a number of named species are of unknown origin, and may just be variants of original wild species.
Spanish and Portuguese explorers probably brought agaves back with them, but really became popular in Europe during the 19th century, with many types being imported by collectors. Some of have been continuously propagated by offset since then, and do not consistently resemble any species known in nature, although this may simply be due to the unnatural growing conditions in Europe.
Species
''Agave aboriginum''
''Agave abortiva''
''Agave abrupta''
''Agave acicularis''
''Agave acklinicola''
''Agave affinis''
''Agave ajoensis'' ''Agave schottii'' var. ''schottii'' ''Agave deserti'' var. ''simplex''
''Agave aktites''
''Agave albescens''
''Agave albomarginata''
''Agave alibertii''
''Agave aloides''
''Agave amaniensis''
''Agave americana'' L. American Agave, American Century Plant, Century Plant, Maguey americano
''Agave americana'' var. ''americana''
''Agave americana'' var. ''expansa''
''Agave americana'' var. ''latifolia''
''Agave americana'' var. ''marginata''
''Agave americana'' var. ''medio picta''
''Agave americana'' var. ''oaxacensis''
''Agave americana'' var. ''striata''
''Agave americana'' ssp. ''protamericana''
''Agave angustiarum''
''Agave angustifolia'' Haw. Century plant, Maguey espad n
''Agave angustissima''
''Agave anomala''
''Agave antillarum''
''Agave antillarum'' var. ''grammontensis''
''Agave applanata''
''Agave arizonica'' Gentry Arizona Agave, Arizona Century Plant
''Agave arubensis''
''Agave aspera''
''Agave asperrima'' Jacobi Maguey spero, Rough Century Plant
''Agave attenuata'' Swan's Neck Agave, Dragon Tree Agave, Foxtail Agave
''Agave aurea''
''Agave avellanidens''
''Agave bahamana''
''Agave bakeri''
''Agave banlan''
''Agave barbadensis''
''Agave baxteri''
''Agave bergeri''
''Agave bernhardi''
''Agave boldinghiana''
''Agave bollii''
''Agave botterii ''
''Agave bouchei''
''Agave bourgaei''
''Agave bovicornuta'' Cowhorn Agave
''Agave braceana''
''Agave brachystachys''
''Agave bracteosa'' Squid Agave
''Agave brandegeei''
''Agave brauniana''
''Agave breedlovei''
''Agave brevipetala''
''Agave breviscapa''
''Agave brevispina''
''Agave brittonia''
''Agave bromeliaefolia''
''Agave brunnea''
''Agave bulbifera''
''Agave cacozela''
''Agave cajalbanensis''
''Agave calderoni''
''Agave calodonta''
''Agave campanulata''
''Agave cantala'' Roxb. cantala, Maguey de la India (supplies Manila Maquey fiber)
''Agave capensis''
''Agave carchariodonta''
''Agave caribaea''
''Agave caribiicola''
''Agave carminis''
''Agave caroli schmidtii''
''Agave celsii''
''Agave cernua''
''Agave cerulata''
''Agave cerulata'' ssp. ''subcerulata''
''Agave chiapensis'' (syn. ''Agave polyacantha'')
''Agave chihuahuana''
''Agave chinensis''
''Agave chisosensis''
''Agave chloracantha''
''Agave chrysantha'' Peebles Golden Flowered Agave, Golden Flower Century Plant
''Agave chrysoglossa''
''Agave coccinea''
''Agave cocui''
''Agave coespitosa''
''Agave colimana''
''Agave collina''
''Agave colorata'' Mescal ceniza
''Agave compacta''
''Agave complicata''
''Agave compluviata''
''Agave concinna''
''Agave congesta''
''Agave conjuncta''
''Agave connochaetodon''
''Agave consociata''
''Agave convallis''
''Agave corderoyi''
''Agave costaricana''
''Agave cucullata''
''Agave cundinamarcensis''
''Agave cupreata''
''Agave dasyliriodes''
''Agave datylio''
''Agave davilloni''
''Agave de meesteriana''
''Agave dealbata''
''Agave deamiana''
''Agave debilis''
''Agave decaisneana''
''Agave decipiens'' Baker False Sisal
''Agave delamateri'' W.C. Hodgson L. Slauson
''Agave densiflora''
''Agave dentiens''
''Agave deserti'' Engelm. Desert Century Plant, Desert Agave, Maguey de Desierto
''Agave deserti'' ssp. ''simplex''
''Agave desmettiana'' Jacobi Dwarf Century Plant, Smooth Agave (syn. ''A. miradorensis'')
''Agave diacantha''
''Agave difformis''
''Agave disceptata''
''Agave disjuncta''
''Agave dissimulans''
''Agave donnell smithii''
''Agave durangensis''
''Agave dussiana''
''Agave eborispina''
''Agave eduardi''
''Agave eggersiana'' Trel. Eggers' Century Plant, St. Croix Agave
''Agave ehrenbergii''
''Agave eichlami''
''Agave ekmani''
''Agave elizae''
''Agave ellemeetiana''
''Agave endlichiana''
''Agave engelmanni''
''Agave entea''
''Agave erosa''
''Agave evadens''
''Agave excelsa''
''Agave expatriata''
''Agave falcata''
''Agave falcata'' var. ''espadina''
''Agave falcata'' var. ''microcarpa''
''Agave felgeri'' Mescalito
''Agave felina''
''Agave fenzliana''
''Agave ferdinandi regis''
''Agave filifera'' Thread leaf Agave
''Agave filifera'' subsp. ''microceps''
''Agave flaccida''
''Agave flaccifolia''
''Agave flavovirens''
''Agave flexispina''
''Agave fortiflora''
''Agave fourcroydes'' Lemaire Henequen, Maguey Henequen, Mexican Sisal (supplies henequen fiber)
''Agave fourcroydes var. espiculata''
''Agave fragrantissima''
''Agave franceschiana''
''Agave franzosini''
''Agave friderici''
''Agave funifera''
''Agave funkiana'' Ixtle de Jaumave (syn. ''Agave lophanta'')
''Agave galeottei''
''Agave garciae mendozae''
''Agave geminiflora''
''Agave geminiflora'' var. ''filifera''
''Agave gentryi''
''Agave ghiesbrechtii''
''Agave glabra''
''Agave glaucescens''
''Agave goeppertiana''
''Agave glomeruliflora'' (Engelm.) Berger Chisos Mountain Century Plant, Maguey del Bravo
''Agave gracilipes'' Trel. Maguey de pastizal, Slimfoot Century Plant
''Agave gracilis''
''Agave grandibracteata''
''Agave granulosa''
''Agave grenadina''
''Agave grijalvensis''
''Agave grisea''
''Agave guadalajarana'' Maguey chato
''Agave guatemalensis''
''Agave guedeneyri''
''Agave guiengola''
''Agave gutierreziana''
''Agave guttata''
''Agave gypsophila''
''Agave hanburii''
''Agave harrisii''
''Agave hartmani''
''Agave haseloffii''
''Agave hauniensis''
''Agave havardiana'' Trel. Havard's Century Plant, Chisos Agave, Maguey de Havard
''Agave haynaldi''
''Agave henriquesii''
''Agave hexapetala''
''Agave hiemiflora''
''Agave hookeri''
''Agave horizontalis''
''Agave horrida''
''Agave houghii''
''Agave huachucaensis''
''Agave huehueteca''
''Agave humboldtiana''
''Agave hurteri''
''Agave impressa''
''Agave inaequidens''
''Agave inaguensis''
''Agave indagatorum''
''Agave ingens''
''Agave inopinabilis''
''Agave integrifolia''
''Agave intermixta''
''Agave intrepida''
''Agave isthmensis''
''Agave jaiboli''
''Agave jarucoensis''
''Agave karatto''
''Agave kellermaniana''
''Agave kerchovei''
''Agave kewensis''
''Agave kirchneriana''
''Agave lagunae''
''Agave langlassei''
''Agave laticincta''
''Agave latifolia''
''Agave laurentiana''
''Agave laxa''
''Agave laxifolia''
''Agave lecheguilla'' Torr. Agave lechuguilla, Lecheguilla, Lechuguilla, Maguey lechuguilla (syn. ''Agave heteracantha'')
''Agave lemairei''
''Agave lempana''
''Agave lespinassei''
''Agave lindleyi''
''Agave littaeaoides''
''Agave longipes''
''Agave longisepala''
''Agave lophantha'' Schiede Maguey mezortillo, Thorncrest Century Plant
''Agave lurida''
''Agave macrantha''
''Agave macroculmis'' ( ''Agave gentryi'') Hardy Century Plant
''Agave maculata''
''Agave madagascariensis''
''Agave mapisaga''
''Agave margaritae''
''Agave marmorata''
''Agave martiana''
''Agave maximiliana''
''Agave maximowicziana''
''Agave mayoensis''
''Agave mckelveyana'' Gentry Mckelvey Agave, McKelvey's Century Plant
''Agave medioxima''
''Agave megalacantha''
''Agave melanacantha''
''Agave melliflua''
''Agave mexicana''
''Agave micracantha''
''Agave millspaughii''
''Agave minarum''
''Agave mirabilis''
''Agave missionum'' Trel. Corita
''Agave mitis''
''Agave monostachya''
''Agave montana''
''Agave montserratensis''
''Agave moranii''
''Agave morrisii''
''Agave muilmanni''
''Agave mulfordiana''
''Agave multifilifera''
''Agave multiflora''
''Agave multilineata''
''Agave murpheyi'' F. Gibson Maguey Bandeado, Murphey Agave, Murphey's Century Plant, Hohokam Agave
''Agave nashii''
''Agave nayaritensis''
''Agave neglecta'' Small Wild Century Plant
''Agave nelsoni''
''Agave nevadensis''
''Agave nevidis''
''Agave newberyi''
''Agave nickelsi''
''Agave nissoni''
''Agave nizandensis'' Dwarf Octopus Agave
''Agave noli tangere''
''Agave obducta''
''Agave oblongata''
''Agave obscura''
''Agave ocahui''
''Agave ocahui'' var. ''longifolia''
''Agave offoyana''
''Agave oligophylla''
''Agave oliverana''
''Agave opacidens''
''Agave orcuttiana''
''Agave ornithobroma'' Maguey pajarito
''Agave oroensis''
''Agave ovatifolia''
''Agave oweni''
''Agave pachyacantha''
''Agave pachycentra''
''Agave pacifica''
''Agave pallida''
''Agave palmaris''
''Agave palmeri'' Engelm. Maguey de tlalcoyote, Palmer Agave, Palmer Century Plant, Palmer's Century Plant
''Agave pampaniniana''
''Agave panamana''
''Agave papyriocarpa''
''Agave parryi'' Engelm. Mezcal yapavai, Parry Agave, Parry's Agave
''Agave parryi'' var. ''truncata''
''Agave parvidentata''
''Agave parviflora'' Torr. Maguey sbari, Smallflower Agave, Smallflower Century Plant, Little Princess Agave
''Agave parviflora'' subsp. ''flexiflora''
''Agave patonii''
''Agave paucifolia''
''Agave paupera''
''Agave pavoliniana''
''Agave peacockii''
''Agave pedrosana''
''Agave pedunculifera''
''Agave pelona'' Bald Agave
''Agave perplexans''
''Agave pes mulae''
''Agave petiolata''
''Agave petrophila''
''Agave phillipsiana''
''Agave picta''
''Agave planera''
''Agave polianthiflora''
''Agave polianthoides''
''Agave portoricensis'' Trel. Puerto Rico Century Plant
''Agave potatorum'' Drunkard Agave
''Agave potosina''
''Agave potrerana''
''Agave prainiana''
''Agave promontorii''
''Agave prostrata''
''Agave protuberans''
''Agave pruinosa''
''Agave pseudotequilana''
''Agave pugioniformis''
''Agave pulcherrima''
''Agave pulchra''
''Agave pumila''
''Agave punctata''
''Agave purpurea''
''Agave purpusorum''
''Agave pygmae''
''Agave quadrata''
''Agave quiotifera''
''Agave ragusae''
''Agave rasconensis''
''Agave regia''
''Agave revoluta''
''Agave rhodacantha''
''Agave rigida''
''Agave roezliana''
''Agave rudis''
''Agave rupicola''
''Agave rupicola'' var. ''brevifolia''
''Agave rupicola'' var. ''longifolia''
''Agave rupicola'' var. ''rubridentata''
''Agave rutteniae''
''Agave rzedowskiana''
''Agave salmdyckii''
''Agave salmiana'' Pulque, Maguey, Maguey de monta a (syn. ''Agave atrovirens'')
''Agave salmiana'' var. ''angustifolia''
''Agave salmiana'' var. ''cochlearis''
''Agave samalana''
''Agave sartorii''
''Agave scaphoidea''
''Agave scaposa''
''Agave scheuermaniana''
''Agave schildigera''
''Agave schneideriana''
''Agave schottii'' Engelm. Maguey puercoesp n, Schott Agave, Schott's Century Plant, Shindagger, Leather Agave
''Agave schottii'' var. ''serrulata''
''Agave scolymus''
''Agave scolymus'' var. ''polymorpha''
''Agave sebastiana''
''Agave seemanniana''
''Agave seemanniana'' var. ''perscabra''
''Agave serrulata''
''Agave sessiliflora''
''Agave shaferi''
''Agave shawii'' Engelm. Coastal Agave, Maguey primavera
''Agave shrevei''
''Agave shrevei'' ssp. ''magna''
''Agave shrevei'' ssp. ''matapensis''
''Agave sicaefolia''
''Agave simoni''
''Agave sisalana'' Perrine Maguey de Sisal, Sisal, Sisal Hemp (syn. ''Furcraea sisaliana'')
''Agave sleviniana''
''Agave smithiana''
''Agave sobolifera''
''Agave sobolifera'' f. ''spinidentata''
''Agave sobria''
''Agave sobria'' ssp. ''frailensis''
''Agave sordida''
''Agave striata''
''Agave striata'' var. ''mesae''
''Agave stricta''
''Agave stringens''
''Agave subinermis''
''Agave subsimplex''
''Agave subtilis''
''Agave subzonata''
''Agave sullivani''
''Agave tecta''
''Agave tenuifolia''
''Agave tenuispina''
''Agave teopiscana''
''Agave tequilana'' A. Weber Mezcal azul tequilero, Tequila Agave, Weber Blue Agave (gives tequila)
''Agave terraccianoi''
''Agave theometel''
''Agave thomasae''
''Agave thomsoniana''
''Agave tigrina''
''Agave titanota''
''Agave todaroi''
''Agave toneliana''
''Agave tortispina''
''Agave toumeyana'' Trel. Toumey Agave, Toumey's Century Plant
''Agave toumeyana'' var. ''bella''
''Agave trankeera''
''Agave troubetskoyana''
''Agave tubulata''
''Agave tubulata'' ssp. ''brevituba''
''Agave underwoodii''
''Agave unguiculata''
''Agave utahensis'' Engelm. Utah Agave
''Agave utahensis'' var. ''discreta''
''Agave van grolae''
''Agave vandervinneni''
''Agave ventum versa''
''Agave vernae''
''Agave verschaffeltii''
''Agave vestita''
''Agave vicina''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' Queen Victoria's Agave
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''dentata''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''latifolia''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''longifolia''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''longispina''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''ornata''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''stolonifera''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' f. ''viridis''
''Agave victoriae reginae'' ssp. ''swobodae''
''Agave vilmoriniana'' Berger Octopus Agave
''Agave viridissima''
''Agave vivipara''
''Agave vivipara'' var. ''cabaiensis''
''Agave vivipara'' var. ''cuebensis''
''Agave vizcainoensis''
''Agave wallisii''
''Agave warelliana''
''Agave washingtonensis''
''Agave watsoni''
''Agave weberi'' Cels ex Poisson Maguey liso, Weber's Century Plant, Weber Agave
''Agave weingartii''
''Agave wendtii''
''Agave wercklei''
''Agave wiesenbergensis''
''Agave wightii''
''Agave wildingii''
''Agave winteriana''
''Agave wislizeni''
''Agave wocomahi''
''Agave woodrowi''
''Agave wrightii''
''Agave xylonacantha'' Salm Dyck Century Plant, Maguey diente de tiburn
''Agave yaquiana''
''Agave yuccaefolia''
''Agave yuccifolia'' var. ''caespitosa''
''Agave zapupe''
''Agave zebra''
''Agave zonata''
''Agave zuccarinii''
References
Howard Scott Gentry, ''Agaves of Continental North America'' (University of Arizona Press, 1982), the standard work, with accounts of 136 species
External links
King's American Dispensatory Henriette's Herbal
Information on agave contact dermatitis
Category:Agavaceae
Category:Poisonous plants
Category:Dermatology
da:Agave
de:Agaven
es:Agave (planta)
fr:Agave
it:Agave (botanica)
la:Agave (planta)
nl:Agave
ja:
pl:Agawa
fi:Agaavet
zh:
REDIRECT Analysis of variance
'''Asia''' is the largest and most populous region or continent depending on the definition. It is traditionally defined as part of the landmass of Africa Eurasia lying east of the Suez Canal, east of the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian and Black Seas. About 60 of the world's human population lives in Asia, of whom only 2 live in the northern and interior half (Siberia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Xinjiang, Tibet, Qinghai, western Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan) the other 98 live in the remaining half.
Etymology
The word ''Asia'' entered English, via Latin, from Ancient Greek (''Asia'' see also List of traditional Greek place names). This name is first attested in Herodotus (c. 440 BC), where it refers to Asia Minor or, for the purposes of describing the Persian Wars, to the Persian Empire, as opposed to Greece and Egypt. Herodotus comments that he is puzzled as to why three different women's names are used to describe a single land mass (Europa, Asia and Libya, referring to Africa) stating that most Greeks assumed that Asia was named after the wife of Prometheus but that the Lydians say it was named after Asias, son of Cotys who passed the name on to a tribe in Sardis.
Even before Herodotus, Homer knew of a Trojan ally named Asios, son of Hyrtacus, a ruler over several towns, and elsewhere he describes a marsh as (Iliad 2, 461). The Greek term may be derived from Assuwa, a 14th century BC confederation of states in Western Anatolia. Hittite ''assu '' "good" is probably an element in that name.
Alternatively, the ultimate etymology of the term may be from the Akkadian word ''(w)a (m)'', cognate of Hebrew , which means "to go out" or "to ascend", referring to the direction of the sun at sunrise in the Middle East, and also likely connected with the Phoenician word ''asa'' meaning east. This may be contrasted to a similar etymology proposed for ''Europe'', as being from Semitic ''er bu'' "to enter" or "set" (of the sun). However, an originally Mesopotamian or Middle Eastern perspective would not explain how the term "Asia" first came to be associated with Anatolia as lying ''west'' of the Semitic speaking area.
Definition and Boundaries
Medieval Europeans considered Asia as a continent, a distinct landmass. The European concept of the three continents in the Old World goes back to classical antiquity with the etymology of the word rooted in the ancient Near and Middle East. The demarcation between Asia and Africa is the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea. The boundary between Asia and Europe is commonly believed to run through the Dardanelles, the Sea of Marmara, the Bosporus, the Black Sea, the Caucasus Mountains, the Caspian Sea, the Ural River to its source, and the Ural Mountains to the Kara Sea near Kara, Russia. However, modern discovery of the extent of Africa and Asia made this definition rather anachronistic, especially in the case of Asia, which would have several regions that would be considered distinct landmasses if these criteria were used (for example, South Asia and East Asia).
Geologists and physical geographers no longer consider Asia and Europe to be separate continents. It is either defined in terms of geological landmasses (physical geography) or tectonic plates (geology). In the former case, Europe is a western peninsula of Eurasia or the Africa Eurasia landmass. In the latter, Europe and Asia are still part of the Eurasian plate, which excludes the Arabian and Indian tectonic plates.
In human geography, there are two schools of thought. One school follows historical convention and treats Europe and Asia as different continents, categorizing Europe, East Asia (the Orient), South Asia (British India), and the Middle East (Arabia and Persia) as specific regions for more detailed analysis. The other schools equate the word "continent" in terms of geographical region when referring to Europe, and use the term "region" to describe Asia in terms of physical geography. Because in linguistic terms, "continent" implies a distinct landmass, it is becoming increasingly common to substitute the term "region" for "continent" to avoid the problem of disambiguation altogether.
There is much confusion in European languages with the term "Asian". Because a category implies homogenity, the term "Asian" almost always refers to a subcategory of people from Asia rather than referring to "Asian" defined in term of "Asia". The fact that in American English, Asian refers to East Asian (Orientals), while in British English, Asian refers to South Asian reflects this confusion. Sometimes, it is not even clear exactly what "Asia" consists of. Some definitions exclude Turkey, the Middle East, and or Russia. The term is sometimes used more strictly in reference to Asia Pacific, which does not include the Middle East or Russia, but does include islands in the Pacific Ocean a number of which may also be considered part of Australasia and or Oceania. Asia contains the Indian subcontinent, Arabian subcontinent, as well as a piece of the North American plate in Siberia.
Geographical regions
As already mentioned, Asia is a subregion of Eurasia. For further subdivisions based on that term, see North Eurasia and Central Eurasia.
Some Asian countries stretch beyond Asia. See Bicontinental country for details about the borderline cases between Asia and Europe, Asia and Africa, and Asia and Oceania.
The following subregions of Asia are traditionally recognized:
Central Asia
East Asia
Far East
North Asia
South Asia (or Indian Subcontinent)
Southeast Asia
Southwest Asia (or Middle East or West Asia)
Central Asia
There is no absolute consensus in the usage of this term. Usually, Central Asia includes:
the Central Asian Republics of Kazakhstan (excluding its small European territory), Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan.
Afghanistan, Mongolia, and the western regions of China are also sometimes included.
Former Soviet states in the Caucasus region.
Central Asia is currently geopolitically important because international disputes and conflicts over oil pipelines, Nagorno Karabakh, and Chechnya, as well as the presence of U.S. military and U.K. military forces in Afghanistan.
East Asia
This area includes:
The Pacific Ocean island countries of Taiwan and Japan.
North and South Korea on the Korean Peninsula.
China, but sometimes only the eastern regions
Sometimes the nations of Mongolia and Vietnam are also included in East Asia.
More informally, Southeast Asia is included in East Asia on some occasions.
North Asia
This term is rarely used by geographers, but usually it refers to the bigger Asian part of Russia, also known as Siberia. Sometimes the northern parts of other Asian nations, such as Kazakhstan are also included in Northern Asia.
South Asia (or Indian Subcontinent)
South Asia is also referred to as the Indian Subcontinent. It includes:
The Himalayan States of India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh.
The Indian Ocean nations of Sri Lanka and the Maldives. India's Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands also lie in the Indian Ocean.
The peninsular India (also known as the Deccan Plateau)
Sometimes Afghanistan is also included into this category.
Southeast Asia
This region contains the Malay Peninsula, Indochina and islands in the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean. The countries it contains are:
In mainland Southeast Asia, the countries Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.
In Maritime Southeast Asia, the countries of Malaysia, Brunei, the Philippines, Singapore and Indonesia (some of the Indonesian islands also lie in the Melanesia region of Oceania). East Timor (also Melanesian) is sometimes included too.
The country of Malaysia is divided in two by the South China Sea, and thus has both a mainland and island part.
Southwest Asia (or Middle East, Near East or West Asia)
This can also be called by the Western term ''Middle East'', which is commonly used by Europeans and Americans. ''Middle East'' (to some interpretations) is often used to also refer to some countries in North Africa. Southwest Asia can be further divided into:
Anatolia (i.e. Asia Minor), constituting the Asian part of Turkey.
The island nation of Cyprus in the Mediterranean Sea.
The Levant or Near East, which includes Syria, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and the Asian portion of Egypt.
The Arabian peninsula, including Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, Yemen and Kuwait.
The Caucasus region (which straddles both Asia and Europe), namely Transcaucasia, including a small portion of Russia and, arguably, most if not all of Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan.
The Iranian Plateau, containing Iran and parts of other neighbouring nations.
Economy
class "wikitable" style "width:300px " align "right"
big'''Economy of Asia''' bigbrsmallDuring 2003 unless otherwise stated small
Population:
4.001 billion (2002)
GDP (PPP):
US 18.077 trillion
GDP (Currency):
8.782 trillion
GDP capita (PPP):
4,518
GDP capita (Currency):
2,195
Annual growth of br per capita GDP:
Income of top 10 :
Millionaires:
2.0 million (0.05 )
Unemployment
Estimated femalebr income
align "center" colspan "2" smallMost numbers are from the UNDP from 2002, some numbers exclude certain countries for lack of information. small
align "center" colspan "2"
In terms of gross domestic product (PPP), the largest national economy within Asia is that of the PRC (People's Republic of China). Over the last decade, China's and India's economies have been growing rapidly, both with an average annual growth rate above 7 . PRC is the world's second largest economy after the US, followed by Japan and India as the world's third and fourth largest economies respectively (then followed by the European nations: Germany, U.K., France and Italy).
In terms of exchange rates (nominal GDP) however, Japan has the largest economy in Asia and second largest of any single nation in the world, after surpassing the Soviet Union (measured in Net Material Product) in 1986 and Germany in 1968. (NB: A number of supernational economies are larger, such as the EU, NAFTA or APEC). Economic growth in Asia since World War II to the 1990's had been concentrated in few countries of the Pacific Rim, and has spread more recently to other regions. In the late 80's and early 90's Japan's economy was almost as large as that of the rest of the continent combined. In 1995, Japan's economy nearly equalled the USA to tie the largest economy in the world for a day, after the Japanese currency reached a record high of 79 yen. However, since then Japan's currency has corrected and China has grown to be the second largest Asian economy, followed by India in terms of exchange rates. It is expected that China will surpass Japan in currency terms to have the largest nominal GDP in Asia within a decade or two.
Trade blocs:
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
Asia Europe Economic Meeting
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement
Commonwealth of Independent States
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
South Asia Free Trade Agreement (proposed)
Natural resources
Asia is by a considerable margin the largest continent in the world, and is rich in natural resources, such as Petroleum and iron.
High productivity in agriculture, especially of rice, allows high population density of countries in the warm and humid area. Other main agricultural products include wheat and chicken.
Forestry is extensive throughout Asia except Southwest and Central Asia. Fishing is a major source of food in Asia, particularly in Japan.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing in Asia has traditionally been strongest in East and Southeast Asia, particularly in PRC, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and Singapore. The industry varies from manufacturing cheap goods such as toys to high tech goods such as computers and cars. Many companies from Europe, North America, and Japan have significant operations in the developing Asia to take avantage of its abundant supply of cheap labor.
One of the major employers in manufacturing in Asia is the textile industry. Much of the world's supply of clothing and footwear now originates in Southeast Asia.
Financial and other services
Asia has three main financial centers. They are in Hong Kong, Singapore and Tokyo. Call centers are becoming major employers in India and the Philippines, due to the availablity of many well educated English speakers. The rise of the business process outsourcing industry has seen the rise of India and China as the other financial centers.
Early history
The history of Asia can be seen as the distinct histories of several peripheral coastal regions linked by the interior mass of the Central Asian steppe.
The coastal periphery was home to some of the world's earliest known civilizations, each of them developing around fertile river valleys. The civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, and the Yangtze shared many similarities, and may well have exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel. Other innovations, such as that of writing, seem to have been developed individually in each area. Cities, states and empires developed in these lowlands.
The central steppe region had long been inhabited by horse mounted nomads, and from the steppes they could reach all areas of Asia. The earliest postulated expansion out of the steppe is that of the Indo Europeans, who spread their languages into the Middle East, India, and in the Tocharians, to the borders of China. The northernmost part of Asia, including much of Siberia, was largely inaccessible to the steppe nomads, owing to the dense forests, the climate, and the tundra. These areas remained very sparsely populated.
The centre and the peripheries were mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts. The Caucasus and Himalaya mountains and the Karakum and Gobi deserts formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could cross only with difficulty. While technologically and socially, the urban city dwellers were more advanced, in many cases they could do little militarily to defend against the mounted hordes of the steppe. However, the lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound force for this and other reasons, the nomads who conquered states in China, India, and the Middle East often found themselves adapting to the local, more affluent societies.
Population density
The following table lists countries and dependencies by population density in inhabitants and kmsup2 sup.
Unlike the figures in the country articles, the figures in this table are based on areas including inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers) and may therefore be lower here.
The whole of Egypt, Russia, Kazakhstan, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Turkey are referred to in the table, although they may be considered to be only partly in Asia. Asia also contains about 60 of the world's population. Leaving the other 40 of the world's population to other continents.
center
class "wikitable" style "text align:right "
style "text align:center "
! Country Region
! Population Densitybrsmall( kmsup2 sup) small
! Areabrsmall(kmsup2 sup) small
! Populationbrsmall(2002 07 01 est.) small
align "left" ''''
17,684
25
461,833
align "left"
6,389
693
4,452,732
align "left" ''''
6,317
1,092
7,303,334
align "left"
1,070
300
320,165
align "left"
1,002
144,000
133,376,684
align "left"
987
665
656,397
align "left"
627
35,980
22,548,009
align "left"
491
98,480
48,324,000
align "left"
354
10,400
3,677,780
align "left"
336
377,835
126,974,628
align "left"
329
3,287,590
1,045,845,226
align "left"
298
65,610
19,576,783
align "left"
290
20,770
6,029,529
align "left"
282
300,000
84,525,639
align "left"
246
329,560
81,098,416
align "left"
184
120,540
22,224,195
align "left"
184
140,800
25,873,917
align "left"
184
803,940
147,663,429
align "left"
134
9,596,960
1,284,303,705
align "left"
121
514,000
62,354,402
align "left"
121
1,919,440
231,328,092
align "left"
118
17,820
2,111,561
align "left"
112
29,800
3,330,099
align "left"
93
185,180
17,155,814
align "left"
90
86,600
7,798,497
align "left"
86
780,580
67,308,928
align "left"
83
9,250
775,927
align "left"
71
69,700
4,960,951
align "left"
71
181,040
12,775,324
align "left"
71
1,001,450
70,712,345
align "left"
69
11,437
793,341
align "left"
69
329,750
22,662,365
align "left"
63
15,007
952,618
align "left"
62
678,500
42,238,224
align "left"
61
5,770
350,898
align "left"
58
92,300
5,307,470
align "left"
57
447,400
25,563,441
align "left"
55
437,072
24,001,816
align "left"
47
143,100
6,719,567
align "left"
45
47,000
2,094,176
align "left"
43
647,500
27,755,775
align "left"
40
1,648,000
66,622,704
align "left"
35
527,970
18,701,257
align "left"
30
82,880
2,445,989
align "left"
24
236,800
5,777,180
align "left"
24
198,500
4,822,166
align "left"
13
212,460
2,713,462
align "left"
12
1,960,582
23,513,330
align "left"
9.6
488,100
4,688,963
align "left"
6.2
2,717,300
16,741,519
align "left"
3.0
13,083,100
39,129,729
align "left"
1.7
1,565,000
2,694,432
style "font weight:bold "
align "left" Total
45,711,848
3,895,528,341
center
Religion
A large majority of people in the world who practice a religious faith practice one founded in Asia.
Religions founded in Asia and with a majority of their contemporary adherents in Asia include:
Bah ' Faith: slightly more than half of all adherents are in Asia
Buddhism: Cambodia, China, Japan, Korea, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, parts of northern, eastern, and western India, and parts of central and eastern Russia (Siberia).
Mahayana Buddhism: China, Japan, Korea, Singapore, Vietnam.
Theravada Buddhism: Cambodia, parts of China, Laos, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand, as well as parts of Vietnam.
Vajrayana Buddhism: Parts of China, Mongolia, parts of northern and eastern India, parts of central, eastern Russia and Siberia.
Hinduism: India, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Malaysia, Singapore, Bali.
Islam: Central, South, and Southwest Asia, Malaysia, Philippines Brunei and Indonesia.
Shia Islam: largely to specific Iran, Azerbaijan, parts of Iraq, Bahrain, parts of Afghanistan, parts of India, parts of Pakistan.
Sunni Islam: dominant in the rest of the regions mentioned above.
Jainism: India
Qadiani: Pakistan, Bangladesh, India.
Shinto: Japan
Sikhism: India, Malaysia, Hong Kong
Daoism: China, Korea, Vietnam, Singapore, and Taiwan
Zoroastrianism: Iran, India, Pakistan
Shamanism: Siberia
Animism: Eastern India
Religions founded in Asia that have the majority of their contemporary adherents in other regions include:
Christianity (Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, Armenia, Georgia, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, East Timor, Pakistan, India and the Philippines)
Judaism (slightly fewer than half of its adherents reside in Asia Israel, Iran, India, Syria.)
See also
Assuwa
Asia Minor
Pan Asianism
References
External links
http: www.lib.utexas.edu maps asia.html
http: www.freeworldmaps.net asia index.html
Category:Continents
af:Asi
ar:
an:Asia
ast:Asia
bg:
zh min nan:A chiu
bn:
bs:Azija
br:Azia
ca: sia
ceb:Asya
cs:Asie
cy:Asia
da:Asien
de:Asien
et:Aasia
el:
es:Asia
eo:Azio
eu:Asia
fa:
fo:Asia
fr:Asie
fy:Aazje
ga:An ise
gl:Asia
gu:
ko:
ht:Azi
hi:
hr:Azija
io:Azia
id:Asia
ia:Asia
is:As a
it:Asia
he:
ka: ( )
csb:Az j
kw:Asi
sw:Asia
ku:Asya
la:Asia
lt:Azija
lb:Asien
li:Azi
jbo:zdotu'a
hu: zsia
mk:
mg:Azia
ms:Asia
mo:
my:
nl:Azi
nds:Asien
ja:
no:Asia
nn:Asia
os:
pl:Azja
pt: sia
ro:Asia
ru:
se: sia
sa:
simple:Asia
sk: zia
sl:Azija
sr:
su:Asia
fi:Aasia
sv:Asien
tl:Asya
ta:
th:
vi:Ch u
tr:Asya
uk:
war:Asya
yi:
zh:
style " "margin left:" 0.5em " border "1" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0" align "right" width "260px"
font size " 1"'''Aruba''' font
style "background: efefef " align "center" colspan 2
border "0" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px"
align "center" width "140px" (In Detail)
align "center" width "140px" (In Detail)
align "center" colspan 2 font size " 1"''National motto: One Happy Island'' font
align "center" colspan 2
Official language Dutch
Political status Dependent area of the Netherlands
Capital Oranjestad
Queen
Beatrix
Governor Fredis Refunjol
Prime Minister
Nelson O. Oduber
Areabr Total br water
(Not ranked)br 180 km br Negligible
Population
br Total (2004 est.)
br Density
(Ranked 187)
br 103,000 (2004)
br 363 km
Currency Aruban florin
Time zone
UTC 4
National anthem Aruba Dushi Tera
Internet TLD .aw
Calling Code
297
'''Aruba''' is an island in the Caribbean Sea, just a short distance north of the Venezuelan Paraguan Peninsula, and it forms a part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Unlike much of the Caribbean region, it has a dry climate and an arid, cactus strewn landscape. This climate has helped tourism, however, as visitors to the island can reliably expect warm, sunny weather.
History
:''Main article: History of Aruba''
Discovered and claimed for Spain in 1499, Aruba was acquired by the Dutch in 1636. The island's economy has been dominated by three main industries. A 19th century gold rush was followed by prosperity brought on by the opening in 1924 of an oil refinery. The last decades of the 20th century saw a boom in the tourism industry.
Aruba seceded from the Netherlands Antilles on January 1, 1986, and became a separate, self governing member of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Movement toward full independence by 1996 was halted at Aruba's request in 1990.
Politics
:''Main article: Politics of Aruba''
Aruba is a part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, but maintains full control over its own affairs except for issues dealing with national defence, citizenship, foreign affairs, and extradition. Aruba has its own laws, constitution, government, and currency.
The Aruban head of state is the ruling monarch of the Netherlands, who is represented in Aruba by a governor, appointed for a six year term. The head of government is the Prime Minister, who forms, together with the Council of Ministers, the executive branch of the government.
They are elected by the parliament, the unicameral Legislature or ''Staten'', which holds 21 seats. Members are elected by direct, popular vote to serve four year terms.
Geography
:''Main article: Geography of Aruba''
Aruba is a generally flat, riverless island renowned for its white sand beaches. Most of these are located on the western and southern coasts of the island, which are relatively sheltered from fierce ocean currents. The northern and eastern coasts, lacking this protection, are considerably more battered by the sea and have been left largely untouched by humans. The interior of the island features some rolling hills, the better two of which are called Hooiberg at 165 metres (541 ft) and Mount Jamanota, which is the highest on the island, at 188 metres (617 ft) above sea level. Oranjestad, the capital, is located at .
As a separate member state of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the island state has no administrative subdivisions. On the east are Cura ao and Bonaire,two island territories which form the southwest part of the Netherlands Antilles Aruba and these two Netherlands Antilles islands are also known as the ABC islands.
The local climate is a pleasant tropical marine climate. Little seasonal temperature variation exists, which helps Aruba to attract tourists all year round. Temperatures are almost constant at about 28 C (82 F), moderated by constant trade winds from the Atlantic Ocean. Yearly precipitation barely reaches 500 mm (20 in), most of it falling in late autumn.
Economy
:''Main article: Economy of Aruba''
Aruba enjoys one of the highest standards of living in the Caribbean region, with low poverty and unemployment rates. About half of the Aruban Gross National Product is earned with tourism or related activities. Most of the tourists are from Canada, the European Union and other places notably the United States, which is the country's largest trading partner. Oil processing is the dominant industry in Aruba, despite expansion of the tourism sector. The size of the agriculture and manufacturing industries remains minimal.
Deficit spending has been a staple in Aruba's history, and modestly high inflation has been present as well, although recent efforts at tightening monetary policy may correct this. Aruba receives some development aid from the Dutch government each year. The Aruban guilder has a fixed exchange rate with the United States dollar of 1.79:1.
Demographics
, year 2005 Number of inhabitants in thousands.
Having poor soil and aridity, Aruba was saved from plantation economics and the slave trade. In 1515, the Spanish transported the entire population to Hispaniola to work in the copper mines most were allowed to return when the mines were tapped out. The Dutch, who took control a century later, left the Arawaks to graze livestock, using the island as a source of meat for other Dutch possessions in the Caribbean. The Arawak heritage is stronger on Aruba than on most Caribbean islands. No full blooded Indians remain, but the features of the islanders clearly indicate their genetic heritage. The majority of the population is descended from Arawak, Dutch and Spanish ancestors. Recently there has been substantial immigration to the island from neighboring Latin American and Caribbean nations, attracted by the lure of well paying jobs.
The two official languages are the Dutch language and the predominant, national language Papiamento, which is classified as a Creole language. This creole language is formed primarily from 16th century Portuguese, and several other languages. Spanish and English are also spoken. Islanders can often speak four or more languages and are mostly Roman Catholic.
'''Population:''' 103,000( April 2004 est.)
'''Age structure:'''
0 14 years: 20.7 (male 7,540 female 7,121)
15 64 years: 68.3 (male 23,427 female 24,955)
65 years and over: 11 (male 3,215 female 4,586) (2003 est.)
'''Median age:'''
total: 37.1 years
male: 35.3 years
female: 38.5 years (2002)
'''Population growth rate:''' 0.55 (2003 est.)
'''Birth rate:''' 11.86 births 1,000 population (2003 est.)
'''Death rate:''' 6.38 deaths 1,000 population (2003 est.)
'''Net migration rate:''' 0 migrant(s) 1,000 population (2003 est.)
'''Sex ratio:'''br
at birth: 1.05 male(s) femalebr
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s) femalebr
15 64 years: 0.94 male(s) femalebr
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s) femalebr
total population: 0.93 male(s) female (2003 est.)
'''Infant mortality rate:'''
total: 6.14 deaths 1,000 live births
female: 5.25 deaths 1,000 live births (2003 est.)
male: 6.99 deaths 1,000 live births
'''Life expectancy at birth:'''
total population: 78.83 years
male: 75.48 years
female: 82.34 years (2003 est.)
'''Total fertility rate:''' 1.79 children born woman (2003 est.)
'''Nationality:'''br
''noun:'' Aruban(s)br
''adjective:'' Aruban Dutch
'''Religions:''' Roman Catholic 82 , Protestant 8 , Hindu, Muslim, Confucian, Jewish
'''Languages:'''
Dutch (official), Papiamento (national language), Spanish, English.
Culture
:''Main article: Culture of Aruba''
The origins of the population and location of the island give Aruba a mixed culture. Dutch influence can still be seen, even though not much of the population is of Dutch origin. Tourism from the United States has recently also increased the visibility of American culture on the island. Queen Beatrix International Airport, located near Oranjestad, Aruba, currently serves the whole island of Aruba. This airport has access to various cities across the eastern U.S., from Miami, Orlando, Houston, Atlanta to New York. It also connects Aruba with Europe through the Schiphol Airport in the Netherlands.
The holiday of Carnival is an important one in Aruba, as it is in many Caribbean and Latin American countries. Carnival is usually held from the beginning of January until the end of February, with a large parade on the final Sunday of the festivities.
''See also: Music of Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles''
Language
Language can be seen as an important part of island culture in Aruba. The cultural mixture has given way to a linguistic mixture known as "Papiamento". However, islanders are known to speak many languages. Islanders often speak Papiamento, English, Dutch and Spanish. In recent years the government of Aruba has shown an increased interest in acknowledging the cultural and historical importance of its native language.
Places of interest
Alto Vista Chapel
Arikok National Park
Ayo and Casibari Rock Formations
Frenchman's Pass
Hooiberg
Lourdes Grotto
(Collapsed on September 2, 2005 )
Natural Pool
Palm and Eagle Beaches
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Aruba
Foreign relations of Aruba
Transportation in Aruba
Military of Aruba
External links
Official governmental portal
The original website for Aruba Visitors, established in 1996.
CIA World Factbook on Aruba
An and a are available at Caribbean On Line.com
Aruba Message Board
Aruba Message Board
The official Central Bank of Aruba.
Aruba's electric utility
The Definitive Aruba Vacation Guide
Category:Aruba
Category:Caribbean islands
Category:Special territories of the European Union
ar:
zh min nan:Aruba
ca:Aruba
de:Aruba
et:Aruba
es:Aruba
eo:Arubo
eu:Aruba
fr:Aruba
gl:Aruba
ko:
hr:Aruba
id:Aruba
ia:Aruba
is:Ar ba
it:Aruba
he: ( )
lv:Aruba
lt:Aruba
li:Aruba
hu:Aruba
mk:
nl:Aruba
nds:Aruba
ja:
no:Aruba
nn:Aruba
pl:Aruba
pt:Aruba
ro:Aruba
ru:
sh:Aruba
simple:Aruba
sl:Aruba
fi:Aruba
sv:Aruba
tl:Aruba
tr:Aruba
zh:
The '''Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union''', commonly known as the '''Articles of Confederation''' was the first governing document of the United States of America.
The articles, which combined the 13 colonies of the American Revolutionary War into a loose confederation, were adopted by the Second Continental Congress on November 15, 1777, after 16 months of debate. The articles were ratified three years later on March 1, 1781.
The articles were eventually replaced by the United States Constitution on June 21, 1788, when the ninth state, New Hampshire, ratified the Constitution. According to their own terms for modification, however, the articles were still in effect until 1790, when every one of the 13 states had ratified the new Constitution.
Ratification
The Articles of Confederation were submitted to the states for ratification on November 17 1777, accompanied by a letter from Congress urging that the document
:''be candidly reviewed under a sense of the difficulty of combining in one general system the various sentiments and interests of a continent divided into so many sovereign and independent communities, under a conviction of the absolute necessity of uniting all our councils and all our strength, to maintain and defend our common liberties ... ''
The document only became effective as it was ratified by the states. This process dragged on for several years, stalled by an interstate quarrel over claims to uncolonized land in the west. Maryland was the last hold out it refused to ratify until Virginia and New York agreed to rescind their claims to lands in the Ohio River valley. All of the colonies rebelling against Britain ratified it by 1781.
Although Congress debated the Articles for over a year, it requested immediate action on the part of the states. On February 5 1778 South Carolina became the first state to ratify the Articles of Confederation. However, three and a half years passed before the final ratification by Maryland on March 1 1781.
Article Summaries
Even though the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution were established by much of the same people, they were still very different. The document contained 13 articles, a conclusion, and a signatory section.
Establishes the name of the confederation as "The United States of America"
Explains the rights possessed by any state, and the amount of power to which any state is entitled
Establishes the United States as a league of states united "...for their common defense, the security of their liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist each other, against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them..."
Establishes freedom of movementanyone can pass freely between states, excluding "paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice excepted." All people are entitled to the rights established by the state into which he or she travels. If a crime is committed in one state and the perpetrator flees to another state, he will be extradited to and tried in the state in which the crime was committed.
Allocates one vote in the Congress of the Confederation (United States in Congress Assembled) to each state, which was entitled to a delegation of between two and seven members. Members of Congress were appointed by state legislatures individuals could not serve more than three out of any six years.
Limits the powers of states to conduct foreign relations and to declare war.
When an army is raised for common defense, colonels and military ranks below colonel will be named by the state legislatures.
Expenditures by the United States will be paid by funds raised by state legislatures, and apportioned to the states based on the real property values of each.
Defines the rights of the central government: to declare war, to set weights and measures (including coins), and for Congress to serve as a final court for disputes between states.
Defines a Committee of the States to be a government when Congress is not in session.
Requires nine states to approve the admission of a new state into the confederacy preapproves Canada, if they apply for membership.
Reaffirms that the Confederation accepts war debt incurred by Congress before the articles (assumption).
Declares that the articles are perpetual, and can only be altered by approval of Congress with ratification by ''all'' the state legislatures.
Still at war with the Kingdom of Great Britain, the colonists were reluctant to establish another powerful national government. Jealously guarding their new independence, the Continental Congress created a loosely structured unicameral legislature that protected the liberty of the individual states at the expense of the confederation. While calling on Congress to regulate military and monetary affairs, for example, the Articles of Confederation provided no mechanism to ensure states complied with requests for troops or revenue. At times this left the military in a precarious position, as George Washington wrote in a 1781 letter to the governor of Massachusetts, John Hancock.
The end of the war
The Treaty of Paris (1783), ending hostilities with Great Britain, languished in Congress for months because state representatives failed to attend sessions of the national legislature. Yet, Congress had no power to enforce attendance. Writing to George Clinton in September 1783, George Washington complained:
:''Congress have come to no determination yet respecting the Peace Establishment, nor am I able to say when they will. I have lately had a conference with a Committee on this subject, and have reiterated my former opinions, but it appears to me that there is not a sufficient representation to discuss Great National points.''
Function
The Articles supported the Congressional direction of the Continental Army, and allowed the Thirteen Colonies to present a unified front when dealing with the European powers. But as an instrument of government, they were largely a failure. Congress could make decisions, but had no power to enforce them.
Perhaps the most important power that Congress was denied was the power of taxation: Congress could only request money from the states. Understandably, the states did not generally comply with the requests in full, leaving the confederation chronically short of funds. The states and the national congress had both incurred debts during the war, and paying congressional debts became a major issue.
Nevertheless the Continental Congress did take two actions with lasting impact. The Land Ordinance of 1785 established the general land survey and ownership provisions used throughout later American expansion. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 noted the agreement of the original states to give up western land claims and cleared the way for the entry of new states.
Once the unity demanded by the Revolutionary War became unnecessary, the Continental Army was largely disbanded. A very small national force was maintained to man frontier forts and protect against Indian attacks. Meanwhile, each of the states had an army (or militia), and 11 of them had navies. The wartime promises of bounties and land grants to be paid for service were not being met. In 1783, Washington defused the Newburgh conspiracy, but riots by unpaid Pennsylvania veterans forced the Congress to leave Philadelphia on June 21.
Revision
In May 1786, Charles Pinckney of South Carolina proposed that Congress revise the Articles of Confederation. Recommended changes included granting Congress power over foreign and domestic commerce, and providing means for Congress to collect money from state treasuries. Unanimous approval was necessary to make the alterations, however, and Congress failed to reach a consensus.
In September, five states assembled in the Annapolis Convention (1786) to discuss adjustments that would improve commerce. Under their chairman, Alexander Hamilton, they invited state representatives to convene in Philadelphia to discuss improvements to the federal government. After debate, Congress endorsed the plan to revise the Articles of Confederation on February 21 1787. According to some historians, the Articles were flawed in particular, the confederal government was unable to settle state disputes on issues like trade and had no power to tax directly. After all, the states were thirteen individual republics. It took radical action to strip them of that sovereignty.
Lessons
Although ultimately replaced by the United States Constitution, the Articles of Confederation provided stability during the American Revolutionary War years. Most importantly, the experience of drafting and living under this initial document provided valuable lessons in self governance and somewhat tempered fears about a powerful central government. Still, reconciling the turmoil between state and federal authority continues to challenge America, as seen in such conflicts as the 1832 Nullification Crisis, the American Civil War (1861 65), post Civil War Reconstruction, and the Supreme Court's landmark ''Brown v. Board of Education'' decision in 1954.
Signatures
The copy of the Articles in the U.S. National Archives has a series of signatures on page six. A list of them is presented here. The signing of the Articles was a process that has caused some confusion. The Articles were approved for distribution to the states, on November 15, 1777. A copy was made for each state and one was kept by the Congress. The copies sent to the states for ratification were unsigned, and a cover letter had only the signatures of Henry Laurens and Charles Thomson, who were the President and Secretary to the Congress.
But, the Articles at that time were unsigned, and the date was blank. Congress began the signing process by examining their copy of the Articles on June 27, 1778. They ordered a final copy prepared (the one in the National Archives), and that delegates should inform the secretary of their authority for ratification.
Then, on July 9, 1778 the prepared copy was ready. They dated it, and began to sign. They also requested each of the remaining states to notify its delegation when ratification was completed. On that date, delegates present from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and South Carolina signed the articles to indicate that their states had ratified. New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland could not, since their states had not ratified. North Carolina and Georgia also didn't sign that day, since their delegations were absent.
After the first signing, some delegates signed at the next meeting they attended. For example John Wentworth of New Hampshire added his name on August 8. John Penn was the first of North Carolina's delegates to arrive (on July 10), and the delegation signed the Articles on July 21, 1778.
The other states had to wait until they ratified the Articles, and notified their Congressional delegation. Georgia signed on July 24, New Jersey on November 26, and Delaware on February 12, 1779. After a wait of two years, Maryland ratified, and her delegates signed the Articles on March 1, 1781. The articles were finally in force.
Congress had debated the Articles for over a year and a half, and the ratification process had taken nearly three and a half years. Many participants in the original debates were no longer delegates, and some of the signers had only recently arrived. The '''Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union''' were signed by a group of men who were never present in the Congress at the same time.
The signers and the states they represented were:
New Hampshire: Josiah Bartlett and John Wentworth Jr.
Massachusetts Bay: John Hancock, Samuel Adams, Elbridge Gerry, Francis Dana, James Lovell, and Samuel Holten
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations: William Ellery, Henry Marchant, and John Collins
Connecticut: Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, Oliver Wolcott, Titus Hosmer, and Andrew Adams
New York: James Duane, Francis Lewis, William Duer, and Gouverneur Morris
New Jersey: John Witherspoon and Nathaniel Scudder
Pennsylvania: Robert Morris, Daniel Roberdeau, Jonathan Bayard Smith, William Clingan, and Joseph Reed
Delaware: Thomas McKean, John Dickinson, and Nicholas Van Dyke
Maryland: John Hanson and Daniel Carroll
Virginia: Richard Henry Lee, John Banister, Thomas Adams, John Harvie, and Francis Lightfoot Lee
North Carolina: John Penn, Cornelius Harnett, and John Williams
South Carolina: Henry Laurens, Will Henry Drayton, John Mathews, Richard Hutson, and Thomas Heyward Jr.
Georgia: John Walton, Edward Telfair, and Edward Langworthy
Presidents of the Congress of the Confederation
The following list are those who led the Congress under the Articles of Confederation as the Presidents of the United States in Congress Assembled. The "president" under the Articles was the presiding officer of Congress, not the chief executive, as is the President of the United States under the Constitution. Also, the Articles defined the powers of a confederation of states as opposed to the current Constitution, which defines the powers of a federation of states.
Samuel Huntington
Thomas McKean
John Hanson
Elias Boudinot
Thomas Mifflin
Richard Henry Lee
John Hancock
Nathaniel Gorham
Arthur St. Clair
Cyrus Griffin
For a full list of Presidents of the Congress Assembled and Presidents under the two Continental Congresses before the Articles, see President of the Continental Congress.
References
, Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774 1789.
, September 11, 1783.
External links
Category:Defunct constitutions
Category:United States historical documents
Category:Legal history of the United States
Category:American Revolution
Category:Federalism
Category:1781 in law
de:Konf derationsartikel
eo:Artikoloj de Konfederacio
fr:Articles de la Conf d ration
it:Articoli della Confederazione
nl:Artikelen van de Confederatie
'''Adam Sedgwick''' (March 22, 1785 January 27, 1873) was one of the founders of modern geology. He proposed the Devonian period of the geological timescale and later the Cambrian period. The latter proposal was based on work which he did on Welsh rock strata.
Sedgwick was born in Dent, at that time in Yorkshire, the third child of an Anglican vicar. He was educated at Sedbergh School and Trinity College, Cambridge.
Introduction
In 1817 he took holy orders, and in 1818 he became Woodwardian Professor of Geology at the University of Cambridge Department of Earth Sciences, holding a chair that had been endowed ninety years before by the natural historian John Woodward. He lacked formal training in geology, but he quickly became an active researcher in geology and paleontology. During his tenure, he immensely enlarged the geological collections of Cambridge University, and carried out important field research all over Great Britain. Sedgwick is said to have remarked, upon being appointed Woodwardian Professor, "Hitherto I have never turned a stone henceforth I will leave no stone unturned." In 1822 he carried out fieldwork unraveling the complex geology of the Lake District of northern England, armed with the new discoveries and techniques of William Smith. He met and befriended the poet William Wordsworth on this expedition, and also met the poet Robert Southey and the chemist John Dalton. His lectures at Cambridge were immensely popular he was a spellbinding lecturer, and breaking with the traditions of his time his lectures were open to women, whom Sedgwick thought could make great contributions to natural history. He continued to rise in his profession: in 1829 he became President of the Geological Society of London, and in 1845 a Vice Master of Trinity College. As Vice Master, he led campaigns to open Cambridge to non Anglicans and to reorganize the academic programs, in the process meeting and becoming close to Queen Victoria and her consort Prince Albert. By the 1850s he was in poor health, cared for by his niece Isabella. Still, he kept giving his famous lectures until 1871.
Early work
Sedgwick was one of several great figures in what has been called the Heroic Age of geology the time when the great geological time periods were defined, and when much exploration and fundamental research was carried out. Sedgwick's work placed him at the epicenter of one of the most heated geological controversies of his day, stemming from his work with the gentleman geologist Roderick Murchison. They explored the geology of Scotland in 1827, and in 1839 they jointly presented their researches on certain rocks in Devon, England, which had a distinctive fossil assemblage that led them to propose a new division of the geological time scale the Devonian. In the early 1830s, both men were working on the rocks of Wales, which were and are very difficult to work on due to extensive folding and faulting. However, they seemed to be older than most of the sedimentary rocks farther east. Murchison documented the presence of a distinctive set of fossils, one in which very few fish were found, but that included numerous different types of trilobites, brachiopods, and other such fossils. Murchison named the system of rocks containing such fossils the Silurian, after the Silures, a Celtic tribe living in the Welsh Borderlands at the time of the Romans. Sedgwick, who had been working in central Wales, proposed the existence of a separate system below the Silurian, which he named the Cambrian after Cambria, the Latin name for Wales. The two presented a joint paper in 1835, entitled "On the Silurian and Cambrian Systems, exhibiting the order in which the older sedimentary strata succeed each other in England and Wales."
Sedgwick's upper "Cambrian" overlapped with the lower part of Murchison's "Silurian." Sedgwick had defined his "Cambrian" using physical characters of the rocks, which were unique to Wales, and had not relied extensively on fossils, which could be found everywhere. Murchison, who had used fossils extensively in defining the Silurian, claimed at first that the upper Cambrian, and then the entire Cambrian, were really parts of the Silurian. The resulting quarrel between the two men left them permanently estranged and took years to resolve. There was more than a simple matter of names involved. Both geologists wanted the honour of describing the rocks that recorded the beginning of life on Earth, for no fossils were known that were older than those of the Cambrian. Murchison felt that the fossils of Sedgwick's "Cambrian" were not different enough from his "Silurian" forms to merit the naming of a geologic time period, and it was some time before truly distinctive Cambrian fossils were documented. Today, following the solution worked out in 1879 by Sedgwick's colleague Charles Lapworth, geologists use both time periods, with a third one the Ordovician, also named for a Celtic tribe in Wales between the Cambrian and the Silurian, equivalent to the disputed "upper Cambrian lower Silurian" beds. Each one of these is now known to be characterized by distinct fossil assemblages.
Disagreement with Darwin
For one summer of his work in Wales which was to lead to this controversy, Sedgwick made a fateful choice of field assistant: a young Cambridge graduate named Charles Darwin. Darwin had passed his examinations for the Bachelor of Arts degree in January 1831, and began attending Sedgwick's geology lectures, which he found fascinating. That summer, the two men explored the rocks of north Wales Darwin got a "crash course" in field geology from Sedgwick, an experience that would stand him in good stead over the next five years, on the round the world voyage of HMS Beagle. During this voyage, Darwin sent rocks and fossils from South America back to Sedgwick, as well as descriptions of the geology of South America. These impressed Sedgwick, who wrote in a letter to Darwin's family:
He is doing admirably in S. America has already sent home a Collection above all praise. It was the best thing in the world for him that he went out on the Voyage of Discovery...
In November 1835, before Darwin had returned to England, Sedgwick read some of Darwin's work on South American geology to the Geological Society of London. This greatly improved Darwin's reputation as a scientist he was inducted into the Society shortly after his return. The two stayed friends until Sedgwick's death, but Sedgwick was upset and disappointed by Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection. After reading The Origin of Species, Sedgwick candidly wrote to Darwin on November 24, 1859:
"If I did not think you a good tempered parts I laughed at till my sides were almost sore other parts I read with absolute sorrow because I think them utterly false grievously mischievous You have deserted after a start in that tram road of all solid physical truth the true method of induction. . . "
However despite this difference of opinion, the two men remained friendly until Sedgwick's death.
Flawed opinions
Sedgwick's own geological views were generally catastrophic he believed that the history of the Earth had been marked by a series of cataclysmic events which had destroyed much of the Earth's life. In this belief he followed Cuvier, and he was opposed to Charles Lyell's models of slow, gradual geological change and a more or less steady state Earth. However, Sedgwick was interested in the possibility that at least some of the "catastrophic" changes implied by the rock record might be shown to be gradual. He originally followed his colleague William Buckland in believing that the uppermost Pleistocene deposits had been laid down by the Biblical Flood, but retracted this belief after many of these deposits turned out to have been formed by glaciers, not floods. Sedgwick also did not object to evolution, or "development" as such theories were called then, in the broad sense to the fact that the life on Earth had changed over time. Nor was he a young Earth creationist he believed that the Earth must be extremely old. As Darwin wrote of Sedgwick's lectures, "What a capital hand is Sedgewick sic for drawing large cheques upon the Bank of Time!"
However, Sedgwick believed in the Divine creation of life over long periods of time, by "a power I cannot imitate or comprehend but in which I believe, by a legitimate conclusion of sound reason drawn from the laws of harmonies of nature." What Sedgwick objected to was the apparent amoral and materialist nature of Darwin's proposed mechanism, natural selection, which he thought degrading to humanity's spiritual aspirations. His letter of November 24 went on to state:
This view of nature you have stated admirably tho' admitted by all naturalists but how came it about? Here, in language, , if I do not mistake your meaning, you have done your best in one or two pregnant cases to break it. Were it possible (which thank God it is not) to break it, humanity in my mind, would suffer a damage that might brutalize it sink the human race into a lower grade of degradation than any into which it has fallen since its written records tell us of its history.
External links
Sedgwick, Adam
Sedgwick, Adam
Sedgwick, Adam
Sedgwick, Adam
Sedgwick, Adam
Sedgwick, Adam
de:Adam Sedgwick
fr:Adam Sedgwick
'''Aa River''' may refer to:
The Aa River (France), in the north of France
The Aabach (Greifensee) river in Switzerland
The Aabach (Afte) river in Germany, a tributary of the Afte River
The Lielupe river (called "Kurl ndische Aa" in German) in Latvia
The Gauja river (called "Livl ndische Aa" in German) in Latvia
!
Aa is also an English noun, beloved of Scrabble players, meaning a stream.
!
The Sarner Aa river in Switzerland
The Engelberger Aa river in Switzerland
The Westf lische Aa river in the Westphalia region of Germany
The M nstersche Aa river in the M nster region of Germany
The Great Aa (Gro e Aa) river in Germany
in the Netherlands and Belgium:
Aa, a river in Antwerp, and joining the Kleine Nete at Grobbendonk.
Drentse Aa, a small river in the Drenthe and Groningen provinces that also flows through Groningen city.
Aa, a river in Noord Brabant, flowing through Helmond and 's Hertogenbosch.
Aa or Weerijs, also in Noord Brabant, a small river near Breda, rising at Wuustwezel, Belgium, joint by the Kleine Aa, rising at Brecht, Belgium.
several small rivers and canals in Groningen province, such as Pekel Aa, Ruiten Aa, Mussel Aa.
de:Liste der Gew sser mit Aa
et:Aa j gi
fr:Aa (fleuve)
ga:Aa (abhainn)
nl:Aa (waternaam)
zh:
'''Arthur Koestler''' (September 5, 1905, Budapest March 3, 1983, London) was a Hungarian polymath who became a naturalized British subject. He wrote journalism, novels, social philosophy, and books on scientific subjects. He was a Communist during much of the 1930s and remained politically active until the 1950s. He wrote a number of popular books, including ''Arrow in the Blue'' (the first volume of his autobiography), ''The Yogi and the Commissar'' (a collection of essays, many dealing with Communism), ''The Sleepwalkers'' (''A History of Man's Changing Vision of the Universe''), ''The Act of Creation'', and ''The Thirteenth Tribe'' giving a new theory of the origins of the Jews of Eastern Europe. His most famous work, the novel ''Darkness at Noon'' about the Soviet purges of the 1930s, ranks with George Orwell's ''Nineteen Eighty Four'' as a fictional treatment of Stalinism. He also wrote ''Encyclop dia Britannica'' articles.! Many number?? I know but one.
Life
He was born K sztler Artur (Hungarians put the surname first) in Budapest, Hungary to a German speaking Hungarian family of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. His father, Henrik, was an industrialist and inventor whose business ideas revealed flawed judgement for example, he invested for a while in the manufacture of a kind of radioactive soap. When Artur was 14, his family moved to Vienna, Austria. In 1918, Hungary obtained its independence from Austria and flirted for a while with Bolshevism.
Koestler studied science and psychology at the University of Vienna, where he became involved in Zionism. After completing his studies, he worked as a news correspondent. From 1926 to 1929 he lived in the British Mandate of Palestine, partly in a ''kibbutz''. He joined the German Communist Party in 1931, but left it after the Stalinist purges of 1938. During this period he traveled extensively in the Soviet Union and climbed Mount Ararat in Turkey. In Turkmenistan, he met the black American writer Langston Hughes. In 1931, he was a member of a zeppelin expedition to the North Pole.
In his memoir ''The Invisible Writing'', Koestler recalls that during the summer of 1935 he "wrote about half of a satirical novel called ''The Good Soldier Schweik Goes to War Again....''. It had been commissioned by Willy M nzenberg nowiki nowikithe Comintern's chief propagandist in the West ... but was vetoed by the Party on the grounds of the book's 'pacifist errors'..." (p. 283).
Soon after the outbreak of World War II, the French authorities detained him for several months in a camp for resident aliens at Le Vernet in the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains. Upon his release, he joined the French Foreign Legion. He eventually escaped to England via Morocco and Portugal. In England, he served in the British Army as a member of the British Pioneer Corps, 1941 42, then worked for the BBC. He became a British subject in 1945. He returned to France after the war, where he rubbed shoulders with the set gravitating around Jean Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir. One of the characters in de Beauvoir's novel ''The Mandarins'' is believed based on Koestler.
He returned to London and spent the rest of his life writing and lecturing. He was made a CBE in the 1970s. In 1983, Koestler, suffering from Parkinson's disease and leukemia, committed joint suicide by taking an overdose of drugs with his third wife Cynthia. He had long been an advocate of voluntary euthanasia, and in 1981, had become vice president of "EXIT", a British group campaigning for it. His will endowed the chair of parapsychology at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland.
Multilingualism
In addition to his mother tongue German, Koestler became fluent in Hungarian, English, and French, and knew some Hebrew and Russian. His biographer David Cesarani claims there is some evidence that Koestler may have picked up some Yiddish from his grandfather. Koestler's multilingualism was principally due to his having resided, worked, and or studied in Hungary, Austria, Germany, Palestine (pre independence Israel), the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and France, all by 40 years of age.
Though he wrote the bulk of his later work in English, Koestler wrote his best known novels in three different languages: ''The Gladiators'' in Hungarian, ''Darkness at Noon'' in German (although the original is now lost), and ''Arrival and Departure'' in English. His journalism was written in German, Hebrew, French and English. He claimed to have produced the first Hebrew language crossword puzzles.
Women
Koestler was married to Dorothy Asher (1935 50), Mamaine Paget (1950 52), and Cynthia Jefferies (1965 83). He also had a very short fling with the French writer Simone de Beauvoir, one that may explain the mutual animosity between him and Jean Paul Sartre. David Cesarani claimed that Koestler beat and raped several women, including film director Jill Craigie. The resulting protests led to the removal of a bust of Koestler from public display at the University of Edinburgh.
Questions have also been raised by his suicide pact with his last spouse. Although he was terminally ill at the time, she was apparently healthy, leading some to claim he wrongly persuaded her to take her own life.
Mixed legacy
Just as ''Darkness at Noon'' was selling well during the Cold War of the 40s and 50s, Koestler announced his retirement from politics. Much of what he wrote thereafter revealed a multidisciplinary thinker whose work anticipated a number of trends by many years. He was among the first to experiment with LSD (in a laboratory). He also wrote about Japanese and Indian mysticism in ''The Lotus and the Robot'' (1960). He did not merely arrive at different answers to accepted questions rather, he tended to ask questions that no one else thought to ask.
This originality resulted in an uneven set of ideas and conclusions. Some of them, such as his work on creativity (''Insight and Outlook, Act of Creation'') and the history of science (''The Sleepwalkers''), are arguably brilliant and challenge us to readjust our thinking. Some of his other pursuits, such as his interest in the paranormal, his support for euthanasia, his theory of the origin of Ashkenazi Jews like himself, and his disagreement with Darwinism, are more controversial.
Politics
Koestler was involved in a number of political causes during his life, from Zionism and communism to anti communism, voluntary euthanasia and campaigns against capital punishment, particularly hanging. He was also an early advocate of nuclear disarmament.
Journalism
Until the bestseller status of ''Darkness at Noon'' made him financially comfortable, Koestler often earned his living as a journalist and foreign correspondent, trading on his ability to write quickly in several languages, and to acquire with facility a working knowledge of a new language. He wrote for a variety of newspapers, including ''Vossische Zeitung'' (science editor) and ''B.Z. am Mittag'' (foreign editor) in the 1920s. In the early 1930s, he worked for the Ullstein publishing group in Berlin and did freelance writing for the French press.
While covering the Spanish Civil War, in 1937, he was captured and held for several months by the Falangists in M laga, until the British Foreign Office negotiated his release. His ''Spanish Testament'' records these experiences, which he soon transformed into his classic prison novel ''Darkness at Noon''. After his release from Spanish detention, Koestler worked for the ''News Chronicle'', then edited ''Die Zukunft'' with Willi M nzenberg, an anti Nazi, anti Stalinist German language paper based in Paris, founded in 1938. During and after WWII, he wrote for a number of English and American papers, including ''The Sunday Telegraph'', on various subjects.
Science
During the last 30 years of his life, Koestler wrote extensively on science and scientific practice. The post modernist scepticism colouring much of this writing tended to alienate most of the scientific community. A case in point is his 1971 book ''The Case of the Midwife Toad'' about the biologist Paul Kammerer, who claimed to find experimental support for Lamarckian inheritance.
Mysticism and a fascination with the paranormal imbued much of his later work, and greatly influenced his personal life. He left a substantial part of his estate to establish the Koestler Institute at the University of Edinburgh dedicated to the study of paranormal phenomena. His ''The Roots of Coincidence'' centered on yet another line of unconventional research by Paul Kammerer, this time his claim of a quantum theory of coincidence or synchronicity, a theory Koestler evaluated in light of the writings of Carl Jung. More controversial were Koestler's studies of levitation and telepathy.
Judaism
Although a lifelong atheist, Koestler's ancestry was Jewish. His biographer David Cesarani has claimed that Koestler deliberately disowned his Jewish ancestry.
Koestler's book ''The Thirteenth Tribe'' advanced the controversial thesis that Ashkenazi Jews are not descended from the Israelites of antiquity, but from the Khazars, a Turkic people in the Caucasus who converted to Judaism in the 8th century and were later forced to move westwards into current Russia, Ukraine and Poland. Koestler stated that part of his intent in writing ''The Thirteenth Tribe'' was to defuse anti Semitism by undermining the identification of European Jews with Biblical Jews, with the hope of rendering anti Semitic epithets such as "Christ killer" inapplicable. Ironically, Koestler's thesis that Ashkenazi Jews are not Semitic has become an important claim of many anti Semitic groups. Some Palestinians have eagerly seized upon this thesis, believing that to identify most Jews as non Semites seriously undermines their historical claim to the land of Israel. The thesis of ''The Thirteenth Tribe'' has since been criticized. To date, the genetic evidence has been inconclusive. Some researchers claim to find a Middle Eastern genetic element in virtually all Ashkenazim. Others note both Turkic words and Turkic genetic markers in these populations. But the usefulness of genetic markers in determining ancestry can be problematic for instance, Ashkenazim also display a high level of similarity to the genetic markers of Khoisan Bushmen in Southern Africa. A thorough review of the scientific literature can be found at .
When Koestler resided in Palestine during the 1920s, he lived on a kibbutz, an experience forming the basis of his unfinished ''Thieves in the Night''. His view of Israel was that it would never be destroyed, short of a second Shoah. He supported the statehood of Israel, but opposed a diaspora Jewish culture. In an interview published in the ''London Jewish Chronicle'' around the time of Israel's founding, Koestler asserted that all Jews should either migrate to Israel, or assimilate completely into their local cultures. Koestler was also no dogmatic Zionist for instance, he proposed that Israel drop the Hebrew alphabet for the Roman.
Cultural influence
In his younger days, the singer Sting was an avid reader of Koestler. His band of the time, The Police were to name one of their albums ''Ghost in the Machine'' after one of Koestler's books. The title ''Synchronicity'' was also inspired by Koestler's ''The Roots of Coincidence'', which mentions Carl Jung's theory of the same name. Koestler knew little about the burgeoning New Wave music scene, and is alleged to have said:
blockquote Look at this. Did you ever see a magazine called the ''New Musical Express''? It turns out there is a pop group called The Police I don't know why they are called that, presumably to distinguish them from the punks and they've made an album of my essay ''The Ghost in the Machine''. I didn't know anything about it until my clipping agency sent me a review of the record. blockquote
The cyberpunk manga and anime series ''Ghost in the Shell'' was also inspired by Koestler's ''The Ghost in the Machine''.
Bibliography
An excellent introduction to Koestler's writing and thought is the following anthology of passages from many of his books, described as "A selection from 50 years of his writings, chosen and with new commentary by the author":
1980. ''Bricks to Babel''. Random House, ISBN 0394518977
Autobiography
1952. ''Arrow In The Blue: The First Volume Of An Autobiography, 1905 31'', 2005 reprint, ISBN 0099490676
1954. ''The Invisible Writing: The Second Volume Of An Autobiography, 1932 40'', 1984 reprint, ISBN 081286218X
1937. ''Spanish Testament''.
1941. ''Scum of the Earth''.
1984. ''Stranger on the Square''.
The books ''The Lotus and the Robot'', ''The God that Failed'', and ''Von Weissen N chten und Roten Tagen'', as well as his numerous essays, all contain autobiographical information.
Biographies
Atkins, J., 1956. ''Arthur Koestler''.
Buckard, Christian G., 2004. ''Arthur Koestler: Ein extremes Leben 1905 1983''. ISBN 3406521770.
David Cesarani, 1998. ''Arthur Koestler: The Homeless Mind''. ISBN 0684867206.
Hamilton, Iain, 1982. ''Koestler: A Biography''. ISBN 0025476602.
Koestler, Mamaine, 1985. ''Living with Koestler''. ISBN 0297785311 or ISBN 0312490291.
Levene, M., 1984. ''Arthur Koestler''. ISBN 080446412X.
Mikes, George, 1983. ''Arthur Koestler: The Story of a Friendship''. ISBN 0233976124.
Pearson, S. A., 1978. ''Arthur Koestler''. ISBN 0805766995.
Langston Hughes's autobiography also documents their meeting in Turkestan during the Soviet era.
Books by Koestler (excluding autobiography)
1933. ''Von Weissen N chten und Roten Tagen''. Very difficult to find.
1935. ''The Good Soldier Schweik Goes to War Again....'' Unfinished and unpublished.
1937. ''L'Espagne ensanglant e''.
1939. ''The Gladiators'', 1967 reprint, ISBN 0025653202. A novel on the revolt of Spartacus.
1940. ''Darkness at Noon'', ISBN 0099424916
1942. ''Dialogue with Death''. Abridgement of ''Spanish Testament''.
1943. ''Arrival and Departure'', novel. 1990 reprint, ISBN 0140181199
1945. ''The Yogi and the Commissar and other essays''.
1945. ''Twilight Bar''. Drama.
1946. ''Thieves in the Night (novel)''.
1949. ''The Challenge of our Time''.
1949. ''Promise and Fulfilment: Palestine 1917 1949''.
1949. ''Insight and Outlook''.
1955. ''The Trail of the Dinosaur and other essays''.
1956. ''Reflections on Hanging''.
1959. ''The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man's Changing Vision of the Universe''. ISBN 0140192468
1960. ''The Watershed: A Biography of Johannes Kepler''. Based on ''The Sleepwalkers''. ISBN 0385095767
1960. ''Lotus and the Robot'', ISBN 0090598911. Koestler's journey to India and Japan, and his assessment of East and West.
1961. ''Control of the Mind''.
1961. ''Hanged by the Neck''. Reuses some material from ''Reflections on Hanging''.
1963. ''Suicide of a Nation''.
1964. ''The Act of Creation''.
1967. ''The Ghost in the Machine''. Penquin reprint 1990: ISBN 0140191925.
1968. ''Drinkers of Infinity: Essays 1955 1967''.
1970. ''The Age of Longing'', ISBN 0091045207.
1971. ''The Case of the Midwife Toad'', ISBN 0394718232. An account of Paul Kammerer's research on Lamarckian evolution and what he called "serial coincidences".
1972. ''The Roots of Coincidence'', ISBN 0394719344. Sequel to ''The Case of the Midwife Toad''.
1972. ''The Call Girls: A Tragicomedy with a Prologue and Epilogue'' (play).
1973. ''The Lion and the Ostrich''.
1974. ''The Heel of Achilles: Essays 1968 1973'', ISBN 0394495969.
1976. ''The Thirteenth Tribe: The Khazar Empire and Its Heritage'', ISBN 0394402847.
1976. ''Astride the Two Cultures: Arthur Koestler at 70'', ISBN 0394400631.
1977. ''Twentieth Century Views: A Collection of Critical Essays'', ISBN 0130492132.
1978. ''Janus: A Summing Up'', ISBN 0394500520. Sequel to ''The Ghost in the Machine''
1981. ''Kaleidoscope''. Essays from ''Drinkers of Infinity'' and ''The Heel of Achilles'', plus later pieces and stories.
Writings as a contributor
''Encyclopaedia of Sexual Knowledge'' (1935)
''Foreign Correspondent'' (1939),
''The Practice of Sex'' (1940)
''The God That Failed'' (1950) (collection of testimonies by ex Communists)
"Attila, the poet" (1954) (Encounter 1954.2 (5)). On loan at the UCL library of the School of Slavonic Eastern European Studies.
''Beyond Reductionism: The Alpbach Symposium. New Perspectives in the Life Sciences'' (co editor with J.R. Smythies, 1969), ISBN 0807015350
''The Challenge of Chance: A Mass Experiment in Telepathy and Its Unexpected Outcome'' (1973)
''Life After Death'', (co editor, 1976)
''Humour and Wit. I'': Encyclop dia Britannica. 15th ed. vol. 9.(1983)
small(by Arthur Koestler) small
Quotes
"Courage is never to let your actions be influenced by your fears."
"Creative activity could be described as a type of learning process where teacher and pupil are located in the same individual."
"Nothing is more sad than the death of an illusion."
"Prometheus is reaching out for the stars with an empty grin on his face."
"Scientists are peeping toms at the keyhole of eternity."
"The more original a discovery, the more obvious it seems afterwards."
"The most persistent sound which reverberates through man's history is the beating of war drums."
"The principle mark of genius is not perfection but originality, the opening of new frontiers."
"True creativity often starts where language ends."
External links
Koestler and his third spouse left a large sum of money for research into parapsychology: this funded, amongst other things, the Koestler Parapsychology Unit at Edinburgh University
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler, Arthur
Koestler
Koestler
de:Arthur Koestler
es:Arthur Koestler
eo:Arthur KOESTLER
fr:Arthur Koestler
he:
hu:Arthur Koestler
ja:
pl:Arthur Koestler
ro:Arthur Koestler
ru: ,
sk:Arthur Koestler
The '''Atlantic Ocean''' is Earth's second largest ocean, covering approximately one fifth of its surface. The ocean's name, derived from Greek mythology, means the "Sea of Atlas".
This ocean occupies an elongated, S shaped basin extending in a north south direction and is divided into the North Atlantic and South Atlantic by equatorial counter currents at about 8 north latitude. Bounded by the Americas on the west and Europe and Africa on the east, the Atlantic is linked to the Pacific Ocean by the Arctic Ocean on the north and the Drake Passage on the south. An artificial connection between the Atlantic and Pacific is also provided by the Panama Canal. On the east, the dividing line between the Atlantic and the Indian Ocean is the 20 east meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas to Antarctica. The Atlantic is separated from the Arctic Ocean by a line from Greenland to northwestern Iceland and then from northeastern Iceland to southernmost tip of Spitsbergen and then to North Cape in northern Norway.ref. International Hydrographic Organization Special Publication No. 23, 1953. ref
on a fair day.
Covering approximately 20 of Earth's surface, the Atlantic Ocean is second only to the Pacific in size. With its adjacent seas it occupies an area of about 106,400,000 square kilometres (41,100,000 square miles) without them, it has an area of 82,400,000 square kilometres (31,800,000 sq mi). The land area that drains into the Atlantic is four times that of either the Pacific or Indian oceans. The volume of the Atlantic Ocean with its adjacent seas is 354,700,000 cubic kilometres (85,100,000 cu mi) and without them 323,600,000 cubic kilometres (77,640,000 cu mi).
The average depths of the Atlantic, with its adjacent seas, is 3,332 metres (10,932 ft) without them it is 3,926 metres (12,881 ft). The greatest depth, 8,605 metres (28,232 ft), is in the Puerto Rico Trench. The width of the Atlantic varies from 2,848 kilometres (1,770 miles) between Brazil and Liberia to about 4,830 kilometes (3,000 mi) between the United States and northern Africa.
The Atlantic Ocean has irregular coasts indented by numerous bays, gulfs, and seas. These include the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Gulf of St. Lawrence, Mediterranean Sea, Black Sea, North Sea, Labrador Sea, Baltic Sea, and Norwegian Greenland Sea. Islands in the Atlantic Ocean include Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, Rockall, Great Britain, Ireland, Fernando de Noronha, the Azores, the Madeira Islands, the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands, Sao Tome e Principe, Newfoundland, Bermuda, the West Indies, Ascension, St. Helena, Trindade, Martin Vaz, Tristan da Cunha, the Falkland Islands, and South Georgia Island.
Ocean bottom
The principal feature of the bottom topography of the Atlantic Ocean is a great submarine mountain range called the Mid Atlantic Ridge. It extends from Iceland in the north to approximately 58 south latitude, reaching a maximum width of about 1,600 kilometres (1,000 mi). A great rift valley also extends along the ridge over most of its length. The depth of water over the ridge is less than 2,700 metres (8,900 ft) in most places, and several mountain peaks rise above the water, forming islands. The South Atlantic Ocean has an additional submarine ridge, the Walvis Ridge.
The Mid Atlantic Ridge separates the Atlantic Ocean into two large troughs with depths averaging between 3,700 and 5,500 metres (12,000 and 18,000 ft). Transverse ridges running between the continents and the Mid Atlantic Ridge divide the ocean floor into numerous basins. Some of the larger basins are the Guiana, North American, Cape Verde, and Canaries basins in the North Atlantic. The largest South Atlantic basins are the Angola, Cape, Argentina, and Brazil basins.
The deep ocean floor is thought to be fairly flat, although numerous seamounts and some guyots exist. Several deeps or trenches are also found on the ocean floor. The Puerto Rico Trench, in the North Atlantic, is the deepest. The Laurentian Abyss is found off the eastern coast of Canada. In the south Atlantic, the South Sandwich Trench reaches a depth of 8,428 metres (27,651 ft). A third major trench, the Romanche Trench, is located near the equator and reaches a depth of about 7,454 metres (24,455 ft). The shelves along the margins of the continents constitute about 11 of the bottom topography. In addition, a number of deep channels cut across the continental rise.
Ocean sediments are composed of terrigenous, pelagic, and authigenic material. Terrigenous deposits consist of sand, mud, and rock particles formed by erosion, weathering, and volcanic activity on land and then washed to sea. These materials are largely found on the continental shelves and are thickest off the mouths of large rivers or off desert coasts. Pelagic deposits, which contain the remains of organisms that sink to the ocean floor, include red clays and Globigerina, pteropod, and siliceous oozes. Covering most of the ocean floor and ranging in thickness from 60 metres to 3,300 metres (200 ft to 11,000 ft), they are thickest in the convergence belts and in the zones of upwelling. Authigenic deposits consist of such materials as manganese nodules. They occur where sedimentation proceeds slowly or where currents sort the deposits.
Water characteristics
! Unsourced image removed: , Newfoundland
The salinity of the surface waters in the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand by mass and varies with latitude and season. Although the minimum salinity values are found just north of the equator, in general the lowest values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers flow into the ocean. Maximum salinity values occur at about 25 north latitude. Surface salinity values are influenced by evaporation, precipitation, river inflow, and melting of sea ice.
Surface water temperatures, which vary with latitude, current systems, and season and reflect the latitudinal distribution of solar energy, range from less than 2 C to 29 C (28 F to 84 F). ! less than 2 is not 2, but assuming less than 2 intended, degree signs butt to letter with space from number Maximum temperatures occur north of the equator, and minimum values are found in the polar regions. In the middle latitudes, the area of maximum temperature variations, values may vary by 7 C to 8 C (13 F to 15 F).
The Atlantic Ocean consists of four major water masses. The North and South Atlantic central waters constitute the surface waters. The sub Antarctic intermediate water extends to depths of 1,000 metres (3,300 ft). The North Atlantic deep water reaches depths of as much as 4,000 metres (13,200 ft). The Antarctic bottom water occupies ocean basins at depths greater than 4,000 metres (13,200 ft).
Within the North Atlantic, ocean currents isolate a large elongated body of water known as the Sargasso Sea, in which the salinity is noticeably higher than average. The Sargasso Sea contains large amounts of seaweed, and is also the spawning ground for the European eel.
Due to the Coriolis effect, water in the North Atlantic circulates in a clockwise direction, whereas water circulation in the South Atlantic is counter clockwise. The South tides in the Atlantic Ocean are semi diurnal that is, two high tides occur during each 24 lunar hours. The tides are a general wave that moves from south to north. In latitudes above 40 north some east west oscillation occurs.
Climate
The climate of the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent land areas is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well as the winds blowing across the waters. Because of the oceans' great capacity for retaining heat, maritime climates are moderate and free of extreme seasonal variations. Precipitation can be approximated from coastal weather data and air temperature from the water temperatures. The oceans are the major source of the atmospheric moisture that is obtained through evaporation. Climatic zones vary with latitude the warmest climatic zones stretch across the Atlantic north of the equator. The coldest zones are in the high latitudes, with the coldest regions corresponding to the areas covered by sea ice. Ocean currents contribute to climatic control by transporting warm and cold waters to other regions. Adjacent land areas are affected by the winds that are cooled or warmed when blowing over these currents. The Gulf Stream, for example, warms the atmosphere of the British Isles and northwestern Europe, and the cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of northeastern Canada (the Grand Banks area) and the northwestern coast of Africa. In general, winds tend to transport moisture and warm or cool air over land areas. Hurricanes develop in the southern part of the North Atlantic Ocean.
History and economy
The Atlantic Ocean appears to be the second youngest of the world's oceans, after the Southern Ocean. Evidence indicates that it did not exist prior to 180 million years ago, when the continents that formed from the breakup of the ancestral supercontinent, Pangaea, were being rafted apart by the process of seafloor spreading. The Atlantic has been extensively explored since the earliest settlements were established along its shores. The Vikings, Portuguese, and Christopher Columbus were the most famous among its early explorers. After Columbus, European exploration rapidly accelerated, and many new trade routes were established. As a result, the Atlantic became and remains the major artery between Europe and the Americas (known as transatlantic trade). Numerous scientific explorations have been undertaken, including those by the German Meteor expedition, Columbia University's Lamont Geological Observatory, and the United States Navy Hydrographic Office.
The ocean has also contributed significantly to the development and economy of the countries around it. Besides its major "transatlantic" transportation and communication routes, the Atlantic offers abundant petroleum deposits in the sedimentary rocks of the continental shelves and the world's richest fishing resources, especially in the waters covering the shelves. The major species of fish caught are cod, haddock, hake, herring, and mackerel. The most productive areas include the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, the shelf area off Nova Scotia, Georges Bank off Cape Cod, the Bahama Banks, the waters around Iceland, the Irish Sea, the Dogger Bank of the North Sea, and the Falkland Banks. Eel, lobster, and whales have also been taken in great quantities. All these factors, taken together, tremendously enhance the Atlantic's great commercial value. Because of the threats to the ocean environment presented by oil spills, marine debris, and the incineration of toxic wastes at sea, various international treaties exist to reduce some forms of pollution.
In 1858, the first Transatlantic telegraph cable was laid by Cyrus Field.
In 1919, the American NC 4 became the first airplane to cross the Atlantic (though it made a couple of landings on islands along the way).
Later in 1919, a British airplane piloted by Alcock and Brown made the first non stop transatlantic flight from Newfoundland to Ireland.
In 1921, the British were the first to cross the North Atlantic in an airship.
In 1922, the Portuguese were the first to cross the South Atlantic in an airship.
The first transatlantic telephone call was made on January 7, 1927.
In 1927, Charles Lindbergh made the first solo non stop transatlantic flight in an airplane (between New York City and Paris).
After rowing for 81 days and 2,962 miles, on December 3, 1999 Tori Murden became the first woman to cross the Atlantic Ocean by rowboat alone when she reached Guadeloupe from the Canary Islands.
'''Location:'''
body of water between Africa, Europe, the Southern Ocean, and the Americas
'''Geographic coordinates:'''
'''Map references:'''
World
'''Area:'''
''total:'' 76.762 million km (29.637 million mi )
''note:'' includes the Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, part of the Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Labrador Sea, Mediterranean Sea, North Sea, Norwegian Sea, almost all of the Scotia Sea, and other tributary water bodies
'''Area comparative:'''
slightly less than 6.5 times the size of the United States
'''Coastline:'''
111,866 km (69,510 mi)
'''Climate:'''
Tropical cyclones (hurricanes) develop anywhere from off the coast of Africa near Cape Verde to the Windward Islands and move westward into the Caribbean Sea or up the east coast of North America hurricanes can occur from May to December, but are most frequent from late July to early November. Storms are common in the North Atlantic during northern winters, making ocean crossings more difficult and dangerous.
Terrain
The surface is usually covered with sea ice in the Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait, and Baltic Sea from October to June. There is a clockwise warm water gyre (broad, circular system of currents) in the northern Atlantic, and a counter clockwise warm water gyre in the southern Atlantic. The ocean floor is dominated by the Mid Atlantic Ridge, a rugged north south centerline for the entire Atlantic basin, first discovered by the Challenger Expedition.
Elevation extremes
''lowest point:'' Milwaukee Deep in the Puerto Rico Trench 8,605 metres (28,232 ft 5.3 mi)
''highest point:'' sea level 0 metres
Natural resources
Petroleum and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales), sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules, precious stones
Natural hazards
Icebergs are common in the Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, and the northwestern Atlantic Ocean from February to August and have been spotted as far south as Bermuda and the Madeira Islands. Ships are subject to superstructure icing in extreme northern Atlantic from October to May. Persistent fog can be a maritime hazard from May to September. So can hurricanes north of the equator (May to December).
The Bermuda Triangle is popularly believed to be the site of numerous aviation and shipping incidents, due to unexplained and supposedly mysterious causes, but coastguard records do not support this belief.
Current environmental issues
Endangered marine species include the manatee, seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales. Drift net fishing is killing dolphins, albatrosses and other seabirds (petrels, auks), hastening the decline of fish stocks and contributing to international disputes. There is municipal sludge pollution off the eastern United States, southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina, oil pollution in the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North Sea, and industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in the Baltic Sea, North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea.
Notes on geography
Major chokepoints include the Strait of Gibraltar and the Panama Canal strategic straits include the Strait of Dover, Straits of Florida, Mona Passage, The Sound (Oresund), and Windward Passage the Equator divides the Atlantic Ocean into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean (previously known as the Ethiopic Ocean). During the Cold War the so called Greenland Iceland UK (GIUK) Gap was a major strategic concern, the seabed in that area was laid with extensive hydrophone systems to track Soviet submarines.
Ports and harbours
Aberdeen (United Kingdom)
Abidjan (C te d'Ivoire)
A Coru a (Spain)
Accra (Ghana)
lesund (Norway)
Amsterdam (Netherlands)
Antwerp (Belgium)
Bahia Blanca (Argentina)
Baltimore (United States)
Banjul (The Gambia)
Belfast (Northern Ireland)
Bergen (Norway)
Bissau (Guinea Bissau)
Bod (Norway)
Bordeaux (France)
Boston (United States)
Bremen (Germany)
Brest (France)
Bristol (England)
Cadiz (Spain)
Cape Town (South Africa)
Casablanca (Morocco)
Cayenne (French Guiana)
Charleston (United States)
Charlottetown (Canada)
Cherbourg (France)
Conakry (Guinea)
Cork (Republic of Ireland)
Cotonou (Benin)
Dakar (Senegal)
Douala (Cameroon)
Dublin (Republic of Ireland)
Dunkirk (France)
Edinburgh (Scotland)
Everglades, Port (United States)
Fortaleza (Brazil)
Georgetown (Guyana)
Glasgow (Scotland)
Gothenburg(Sweden)
Hamburg (Germany)
Halifax (Canada)
Jacksonville (United States)
Lagos (Nigeria)
Las Palmas (Spain)
Le Havre (France)
Libreville (Gabon)
Lisbon (Portugal)
Liverpool (England)
Lom (Togo)
London (England)
Luanda (Angola)
Macei (Brazil)
Malabo (Equatorial Guinea)
Miami (United States)
Monrovia (Liberia)
Montr al (Canada)
Morehead City (United States)
Nantes (France)
Nantucket (United States)
Narvik (Norway)
New Haven (United States)
New London (United States)
New York (United States)
Newcastle upon Tyne (England)
Newport News (United States)
Norfolk (United States)
Nouakchott (Mauritania)
Oslo (Norway)
Ostend (Belgium)
Palm Beach (United States)
Paramaribo (Suriname)
Peterhead (United Kingdom)
Philadelphia (United States)
Port Harcourt (Nigeria)
Portland (United States)
Porto (Portugal)
Porto Novo (Benin)
Portsmouth (England)
Portsmouth (United States)
Providence (United States)
Puerto Cortes (Honduras)
Qu bec (Canada)
Rabat (Morocco)
Recife (Brazil)
Reykjav k (Iceland)
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)
Rotterdam (Netherlands)
Salvador (Brazil)
Saint Nazaire (France)
Santa Cruz de Tenerife (Spain)
Santander (Spain)
Santos (Brazil)
Savannah (United States)
Seville (Spain)
Saint John (Canada)
Sept les (Canada)
St. John's (Canada)
Southampton (England)
Stavanger (Norway)
Sydney (Canada)
Tangier (Morocco)
Trois Rivi res (Canada)
Troms (Norway)
Trondheim (Norway)
Vigo (Spain)
Vit ria (Brazil)
Walvis Bay (Namibia)
Willemstad (Netherlands Antilles)
Wilmington (United States)
Yarmouth (Canada)
Note on transportation
The Saint Lawrence Seaway is an important waterway.
References
div style "font size:85 "
references
div
Much of this article comes from the public domain site nowikihttp: oceanographer.navy.mil atlantic.html nowiki (dead link). It is now accessible from the Internet Archive at http: web.archive.org web 20020221215514 http 3a oceanographer.navy.mil atlantic.html.
Disclaimers for this website, including its status as a public domain resource, are recorded on the Internet Archive at http: web.archive.org web 20020212021049 http 3a oceanographer.navy.mil warning.html.
External links
Plot and download ocean observations
Category:Atlantic Ocean
Category:Oceans
af:Atlantiese Oseaan
als:Atlantik
ar:
an:Ozi n Atlantico
ast:Oc anu Atl nticu
bg:
zh min nan:T i se i
be:
bn:
br:Meurvor atlantel
ca:Oce Atl ntic
cv:
cs:Atlantsk oce n
cy:Cefnfor Iwerydd
da:Atlanterhavet
de:Atlantischer Ozean
et:Atlandi ookean
el:
es:Oc ano Atl ntico
eo:Atlantika Oceano
eu:Atlantiar ozeano
fa:
fr:Oc an Atlantique
fy:Atlantyske Oseaan
ga:An tAig an Atlantach
gl:Oc ano Atl ntico
ko:
hr:Atlantski ocean
io:Atlantiko
id:Samudra Atlantik
is:Atlantshaf
it:Oceano Atlantico
he:
kw:Keynvor Iwerydh
la:Oceanus Atlanticus
lt:Atlanto vandenynas
li:Atlantische Oceaan
hu:Atlanti ce n
mk:
nl:Atlantische Oceaan
nds:Atlantik
ja:
no:Atlanterhavet
nn:Atlanterhavet
pl:Ocean Atlantycki
pt:Oceano Atl ntico
ro:Oceanul Atlantic
ru:
scn:Oc anu Atl nticu
simple:Atlantic Ocean
sk:Atlantick oce n
sl:Atlantski ocean
sr:
fi:Atlantin valtameri
sv:Atlanten
ta:
th:
vi: i T y D ng
tr:Atlas Okyanusu
uk:
zh:
Infobox Philosopher
! Scroll down to edit this page
! Philosopher Category
region Western Philosophers
era 19th century philosophy
color B0C4DE
! Image and Caption
image name Schopenhauer.jpg
image caption Arthur Schopenhauer
! Information
name Arthur Schopenhauer
birth February 22, 1788 (Sztutowo, Poland)
death September 21, 1860 (Frankfurt am Main, Germany)
school tradition Kantianism, Idealism
main interests Metaphysics, Aesthetics, Phenomenology, Morality, Psychology
influences Kant, Plato, Rousseau, Giacomo Leopardi, Spinoza, Berkeley, Hume, Descartes, Buddhism, Hinduism
influenced Wagner, Nietzsche, Wittgenstein, Freud, Jung, Hermann Hesse, Thomas Mann
notable ideas Will, Fourfold root of reason
'''Arthur Schopenhauer''' (February 22, 1788 September 21, 1860) was a German philosopher. He is most famous for his work ''The World as Will and Representation''. He is commonly known for having espoused a sort of philosophical pessimism that saw life as being essentially evil, futile, and full of suffering. However, upon closer inspection, in accordance with Eastern thought, especially that of Hinduism and Buddhism, he saw salvation, deliverance, or escape from suffering in aesthetic contemplation, sympathy for others, and ascetic living. His ideas profoundly influenced the fields of philosophy, psychology, music, and literature.
Life
Schopenhauer was born in 1788 in Sztutowo, Poland, near Gda sk. He was the son of Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer and Johanna Schopenhauer, a middle class mercantile family of Dutch heritage, although they had strong feelings against any kind of nationalism. Indeed, the name Arthur was selected by his father especially because it was the same in English, German, and French. His parents were both from the city, and Johanna was an author as well. After the city was annexed by Prussia during the second partition of Poland in 1793, the Schopenhauer family fled to Hamburg in 1805 Schopenhauer's father died, possibly by suicide, and Johanna moved to Weimar. Because of a promise to pursue a business career, Schopenhauer remained in Hamburg. His disgust of this career, however, drove him away to join his mother in Weimar after only a year. He never got along with his mother when the writer Goethe, who was a friend of Johanna Schopenhauer, told her that he thought her son was destined for great things, Johanna objected: she had never heard there could be ''two'' geniuses in a single family.
Schopenhauer studied at the University of G ttingen and was awarded a PhD from the University of Jena. In 1820, Schopenhauer became a lecturer at the University of Berlin it was there that his opposition to Hegel began.
While in Berlin, Schopenhauer became involved in a consuming lawsuit from a Caroline Marquet. She asked for damages from him, a man of independent means, on the basis that she had been injured when Schopenhauer allegedly pushed her. Marquet had noisily attracted Schopenhauer's attention. Then, Marquet's companion witnessed her as being prostrate outside of his apartment. Marquet claimed that the philosopher had assaulted and battered her after she refused to leave his doorway. In this manner, she succeeded in gaining, through the court, a portion of Schopenhauer's limited wealth he had to make payments for many years. His reputation was permanently damaged by her legal machination.
Schopenhauer's health deteriorated during the year of 1860. He died of natural causes on September 21 of the same year at the age of 72.
Schopenhauer called himself a Kantian and despised Hegel. He formulated a pessimistic philosophy that gained importance and support after the failure of the German and Austrian revolutions of 1848.
Philosophy
Schopenhauer's starting point was Kant's division of the universe into phenomenon and noumenon, claiming that the noumenon was the same as that in us which we call Will. It is the inner content and the driving force of the world. For Schopenhauer, human will had ontological primacy over the intellect in other words, desire is understood to be prior to thought, and, in a parallel sense, will is said to be prior to being. In solving alleviating the fundamental problems of life, Schopenhauer was rare among philosophers in considering philosophy and logic less important (or less effective) than art, certain types of charitable practice ("loving kindness", in his terms), and certain forms of religious discipline Schopenhauer concluded that discursive thought (such as philosophy and logic) could neither touch nor transcend the nature of desire i.e., the will. In ''The World as Will and Representation'', Schopenhauer posited that humans living in the realm of objects are living in the realm of desire, and thus are eternally tormented by that desire (his idea of the role of desire in life is similar to that of Vedanta Hinduism and Buddhism, and Schopenhauer draws attention to these similarities himself).
While Schopenhauer's philosophy may sound rather mystical in such a summary, his methodology was resolutely empirical, rather than speculative or transcendental:
Schopenhauer's identification of the Kantian ''noumenon'' (i.e., the actually existing entity) with what we call our will deserves some explanation. The noumenon was what Kant called the ''Ding an Sich'', the "Thing in Itself", the reality that is the foundation of our sensory and mental representations of an external world in Kantian terms, those sensory and mental representations are mere phenomena. Schopenhauer's assertion that what we call our will is the same as this ''noumenon'' might at first instance strike some as oddly as Heraclitus's revelation that everything is made out of fire.
But Kant's philosophy was formulated as a response to the radical philosophical skepticism of David Hume and his fellow British Empiricists, who claimed that as far as we could tell there was no outside reality beyond our mental representations of it. Schopenhauer begins by arguing that Kant's demarcation between external objects, knowable only as phenomena, and the Thing in Itself of noumenon, contains a significant omission. There is, in fact, one physical object we know more intimately than we know any object of sense perception. It is our own body.
We know our human bodies have boundaries, and occupy space, the same way other objects known only through our named senses do. Though we seldom think of our bodies as physical objects, we know even before reflection that it shares some of their properties. We understand that a watermelon cannot successfully occupy the same space as an oncoming truck. We know that if we tried to repeat the experiment with our own bodies, we would obtain similar results. We know this even if we do not understand the physics involved.
We know that our consciousness inhabits a physical body, similar to other physical objects only known as phenomena. Yet, our consciousness is not commensurate with our body. Most of us possess the power of voluntary motion. We usually are not aware of our lungs' breath, or our heartbeat, unless our attention is called to it. Our ability to control either is limited. Our kidneys command our attention on their schedule rather than one we choose. Few of us have any idea what our livers are doing right now, though this organ is as needful as lungs, heart, or kidneys. The conscious mind is the servant, not the master, of these and other organs. These organs have an agenda which the conscious mind did not choose, and has limited power over.
When Schopenhauer identifies the ''noumenon'' with the desires, needs, and impulses in us that we name "will," what he is saying is that we participate in the reality of an otherwise unachievable world outside the mind through will. We cannot ''prove'' that our mental picture of an outside world corresponds with a reality by reasoning. Through will, we knowwithout thinking that the world can stimulate us. We suffer fear, or desire. These states arise involuntarily. They arise prior to reflection. They arise even when the conscious mind would prefer to hold them at bay. The rational mind is for Schopenhauer a leaf borne along in a stream of pre reflective and largely unconscious emotion. That stream is will and through will, if not through logic, we can participate in the underlying reality that lies beyond mere phenomena. It is for this reason that Schopenhauer identifies the ''noumenon'' with what we call our will.
Also, Schopenhauer's philosophy could be considered as panpsychism and solipsism, and in some way gnostic.
Psychology
Schopenhauer was perhaps even more influential in his treatment of man's mind than he was in the realm of philosophy.
Philosophers have not traditionally been impressed by the tribulations of love. But Schopenhauer addressed it, and related concepts, forthrightly.
:"We should be surprised that a matter that generally plays such an important part in the life of man love has hitherto been almost entirely disregarded by philosophers, and lies before us as raw and untreated material."
He gave a name to a force within man which he felt invariably had precedence over reason: the Will to Live (Wille zum Leben), defined as an inherent drive within human beings, and indeed all creatures, to stay alive and to reproduce.
Schopenhauer refused to conceive of love as either trifling or accidental, but rather understood it to be an immensely powerful force lying unseen within man's psyche and dramatically shaping the world:
:"The ultimate aim of all love affairs ...is more important than all other aims in man's life and therefore it is quite worthy of the profound seriousness with which everyone pursues it."
:"What is decided by it is nothing less than the composition of the next generation..."
These ideas foreshadowed and laid the groundwork for Darwin's theory of evolution, Nietzsche's Will to Power and Freud's concepts of the libido and the unconscious mind.
Aesthetics
:''See main article: Schopenhauer's aesthetics''
This wild and powerful drive to reproduce, however, caused suffering and pain in the world. For Schopenhauer, one way to escape the suffering inherent in a world of Will was through art.
Through art, Schopenhauer thought, the thinking subject could be jarred out of their limited, individual perspective to feel a sense of the universal (metaphysics) directly the "universal" in question, of course, was the will. The contest of personal desire with a world that was, by nature, inimical to its satisfaction is inevitably tragical therefore, the highest place in art was given to tragedy. Music was also given a special status in Schopenhauer's aesthetics as it did not rely upon the medium of representation to communicate a sense of the universal. Schopenhauer believed the function of art to be a meditation on the unity of human nature, and an attempt to either demonstrate or directly communicate to the audience a certain existential angst for which most forms of entertainment including bad art only provided a distraction. A wide range of authors (from Thomas Hardy to Woody Allen) and artists have been influenced by this system of aesthetics, and in the 20th century this area of Schopenhauer's work garnered more attention and praise than any other.
According to Daniel Albright (2005), "Schopenhauer thought that music was the only art that did not merely copy ideas, but actually embodied the will itself."
Politics
Schopenhauer's politics were, for the most part, a much diminished echo of his system of ethics (the latter being expressed in ''Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik'', available in English as two separate books, ''On the Basis of Morality'' and ''On the Freedom of the Will'' ethics also occupies about one fourth of his central work, ''The World as Will and Representation''). In occasional political comments in his ''Parerga and Paralimpomena'' and ''Manuscript Remains'', Schopenhauer described himself as a proponent of limited government. What was essential, he thought, was that the state should "leave each man free to work out his own salvation", and so long as government was thus limited, he would "prefer to be ruled by a lion than one of his fellow rats" i.e., a monarch. Schopenhauer did, however, share the view of Thomas Hobbes on the necessity of the state, and of state violence, to check the destructive tendencies innate to our species. Schopenhauer, by his own admission, did not give much thought to politics, and several times he writes prideful boasts of how little attention he had paid "to political affairs of his day". In a life that spanned several revolutions in French and German government, and a few continent shaking wars, he did indeed maintain his aloof position of "minding not the times but the eternities".
Schopenhauer on women
Schopenhauer is also famous for his essay "On Women" ('' ber die Weiber''), in which he expressed his opposition to what he called "Teutonico Christian stupidity" on female affairs. He claimed that "woman is by nature meant to obey", and opposed Schiller's poem in honor of women, ''W rde der Frauen''. The essay does give two compliments however: that "women are decidedly more sober in their judgment than men are" and are more sympathetic to the suffering of others. However, the latter was discounted as weakness rather than humanitarian virtue.
The ultra intolerant view of women contrasts with Schopenhauer's generally liberal views on other social issues: he was strongly against taboos on issues like suicide and masochism and condemned the treatment of African slaves. This polemic on female nature has since been fiercely attacked as misogynistic. However, he did not hold a universally negative opinion of women in particular one should note that Schopenhauer had a very high opinion of Madame de Guyon, whose writings and biography he highly recommended.
In any case, the controversial writing has influenced many, from Nietzsche to 19th century feminists. While Schopenhauer's hostility to women may tell us more about his biography than about philosophy, his biological analysis of the difference between the sexes, and their separate roles in the struggle for survival and reproduction, anticipates some of the claims that were later ventured by sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists in the twentieth century.
Schopenhauer on homosexuality
Schopenhauer was also one of the first philosophers since the days of Greek philosophy to address the subject of male homosexuality. In the third, expanded edition of ''The World as Will and Representation'' (1856), Schopenhauer added an appendix to his chapter on the "Metaphysics of Sexual Love." In it, he develops the idea that since only mature men and fully adult but pre menopausal women are capable of bearing healthy children, in early adolescence and in late middle age the sexual appetite is susceptible of being turned towards another channel.
While there may again be more autobiography than analysis in this hypothesis, it is consistent with the general tenor of Schopenhauer's thought, which gives the Will in nature the position of setting an agenda for individual lives. It is also one of the first attempts at portraying homosexuality as a natural phenomenon, acknowledging its existence in every culture, and seeking to explain its appearance even in those cultures whose moralities sharply condemn homosexual behaviour.
Schopenhauer on Hegel
Schopenhauer seems to have disliked just about everything concerning his contemporary Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. The following quotation from ''On the Basis of Morality'' (page 15 16) is quite famous:
Quotation If I were to say that the so called philosophy of this fellow Hegel is a colossal piece of mystification which will yet provide posterity with an inexhaustible theme for laughter at our times, that it is a pseudo philosophy paralyzing all mental powers, stifling all real thinking, and, by the most outrageous misuse of language, putting in its place the hollowest, most senseless, thoughtless, and, as is confirmed by its success, most stupefying verbiage, I should be quite right.p
Further, if I were to say that this summus philosophus ... scribbled nonsense quite unlike any mortal before him, so that whoever could read his most eulogized work, the so called Phenomenology of the Mind, without feeling as if he were in a madhouse, would qualify as an inmate for Bedlam, I should be no less right. Arthur Schopenhauer ''On the Basis of Morality'' (page 15 16)
But Schopenhauer had good reason to mistrust the writings of Hegel. In his "Foreword to
the first edition" of his work Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik, Schopenhauer
had found Hegel to have fallen prey to the ''Post hoc ergo propter hoc'' fallacy.
Schopenhauer's critique of Hegel is most certainly directed at his perception that Hegel's works use deliberately impressive but ultimately vacuous jargon and neologisms, and that they contained castles of abstraction that sounded impressive but ultimately contained no verifiable content. He also thought that his glorification of church and state were designed for personal advantage and had little to do with search for philosophical truth. Although Schopenhauer may have appeared vain in his constant attacks on Hegel, they were not necessarily devoid of merit: the Right Hegelians interpreted Hegel as seeing the Prussian state of his day as perfect and the goal of all history up until then.
Common Misconceptions
Many are put off Schopenhauer by descriptions of him as an obstinate and arrogant man, who did not lead the ascetic life that he glorified in his work. The idea that he made resignation into a command to virtue is inaccurate, as he was merely trying to explain asceticism in terms of metaphysics. He does refer to the asceticism as a state of "inner peace and cheerfulness", but he also clearly states that he was not trying to recommend the denial of the will above the affirmation of the will. Furthermore, the call to asceticism was supposed to come to select individuals as knowledge all of a sudden, rather than being a virtue that can be taught. "In general," he wrote, "it is a strange demand on a moralist that he should commend no other virtue than that which he himself possesses." (''The World as Will and Representation'', Vol.I, 68)
Nietzsche seems to have made this misinterpretation, leading some people to a distorted view of Schopenhauer. The following sentence from ''The Twilight of the Idols'' is often quoted:
Schopenhauer did see all these things as means to a more peaceful and enlightened way of life, but none of them were "denial of the will to live". Only asceticism is referred to in that way. Nietzsche also claimed that Schopenhauer did not recognise that suffering had a redemptive quality, yet his recognition of this seems blatantly clear in part 4 of ''The World as Will and Representation''.
Also, his identification of the will with the Kantian "thing in itself" has been misunderstood. Kant defined things in themselves as being beyond comprehension and that no one could know the inner nature of a material thing. It is sometimes thought that Schopenhauer denied this, but he did not. What he did assert was that one could know things about the thing in itself. For example, you can know that the will is a striving force, that it is endless, that it causes suffering, that it will produce boredom if unoccupied, etc. However, he did not say that you could directly know the will. In addition, it has sometimes been criticised that he never defined the will, but he explained that it could not be fully defined.
Influence
Schopenhauer is thought to have influenced the following intellectual figures and schools of thought: Friedrich Nietzsche, Richard Wagner, Sigmund Freud, Charles Darwin, Theodule Ribot, Eugene O'Neill, Max Horkheimer, C. G. Jung, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Samuel Beckett, Jorge Luis Borges, Dylan Thomas, Emil Cioran, Thomas Mann, Phenomenalism, and Recursionism.
See also
Schopenhauer's criticism of the Kantian philosophy
Bibliography
Major works
'' ber die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde'', 1813 ''(On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason)''
'' ber das Sehen und die Farben'', 1816 ''(On Vision and Colours)''
''Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung'', 1818 1819, vol 2 1844 ''(The World as Will and Representation'', sometimes also known in English as ''The World as Will and Idea'')
vol. 1 Dover edition 1966, ISBN 0486217612
vol. 2 Dover edition 1966, ISBN 0486217620
Peter Smith Publisher hardcover set 1969, ISBN 0844628859
Everyman Paperback combined abridged edition (290 p.) ISBN 0460875051
'' ber den Willen in der Natur'', 1836 ''(On the Will in Nature)''
'' ber die Freiheit des menschlichen Willens'', 1839 ''(On Freedom of the Will)''
'' ber die Grundlage der Moral'', 1840 ''(On the Basis of Morality)''
''Parerga und Paralipomena'', 1851
Online texts
'''' (german)
Source
Albright, Daniel (2004). ''Modernism and Music: An Anthology of Sources'', p.39n34. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226012670.
External links
(Contains the false view that Schopenhauer was a solipsist)
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schopenhauer, Arthur
bg:
bs:Arthur Schopenhauer
ca:Arthur Schopenhauer
cs:Arthur Schopenhauer
da:Arthur Schopenhauer
de:Arthur Schopenhauer
eo:Arthur SCHOPENHAUER
es:Arthur Schopenhauer
fi:Arthur Schopenhauer
fr:Arthur Schopenhauer
gl:Arthur Schopenhauer
he:
hr:Arthur Schopenhauer
io:Arthur Schopenhauer
it:Arthur Schopenhauer
ja:
ko:
lt:Art ras openhaueris
lv:Art rs openhauers
mk:
nl:Arthur Schopenhauer
no:Arthur Schopenhauer
pl:Arthur Schopenhauer
pt:Arthur Schopenhauer
ro:Arthur Schopenhauer
ru: ,
sk:Arthur Schopenhauer
sr:
sv:Arthur Schopenhauer
tr:Arthur Schopenhauer
zh:
Infobox Country
native name Rep blica de Angola
common name Angola
image flag Flag of Angola.svg
image coat Angola coa.png
national motto none
image map LocationAngola.png
national anthem Angola Avante!brsmall(Portuguese: Forward Angola!)
official languages Portuguese
capital Luanda
latd 8 latm 50 latNS S longd 13 longm 20 longEW E
government type Multi party democracy
leader titles Head of State br Head of Government
leader names Jos Eduardo dos Santos br Fernando da Piedade br Dias dos Santos
largest city Luanda
area 1,246,700
areami 481,354 ! Do not remove
area rank 22nd
area magnitude 1 E12
percent water Negligible
population estimate 10,978,552
population estimate year 2004
population estimate rank 71st
population census ''unavailable''
population census year ?
population density 8.6
population densitymi 22.3 ! Do not remove
population density rank 213
GDP PPP year 2003
GDP PPP 31,364sup1 sup
GDP PPP rank 83
GDP PPP per capita 2,319
GDP PPP per capita rank 120
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.445
HDI rank 160th
HDI category font color " E0584E"low font
sovereignty type Independence
established events From Portugal
established dates November 11 1975
currency Kwanza
currency code AOA
time zone CET
utc offset 1
time zone DST not observed
utc offset DST 1
cctld .ao
calling code 244
footnotes sup1 sup Estimate is based on regression other PPP figures are extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Programme benchmark estimates.
'''Angola''' is a country in southwestern Africa bordering Namibia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Zambia, and with a west coast along the Atlantic Ocean. The exclave province Cabinda has a border with Congo Brazzaville. A former Portuguese colony, it has considerable natural resources, among which oil and diamonds are the most relevant. The country is nominally a democracy and is formally named the '''Republic of Angola''' (Portuguese: ''Rep blica de Angola'', pron. IPA: ).
Origin and history of the name
The name '''Angola''' is a Portuguese derivation of the Bantu word N gola, being the title of the native rulers of the Quimbundos Kingdom in the 16th century, at the time of colonization by the Portuguese.
History
''Main article: History of Angola''
The earliest inhabitants of the area were Khoisan hunter gatherers. They were largely replaced by Bantu tribes during Bantu migrations. In present day Angola Portugal settled in 1483 at the river Congo, where the Kongo State, Ndongo and Lunda existed. The Kongo State stretched from modern Gabon in the north to the Kwanza River in the south. Portugal established in 1575 a Portuguese colony at Luanda based on the slave trade. The Portuguese gradually took control of the coastal strip throughout the 16th century by a series of treaties and wars. They formed the colony of Angola. The Dutch occupied Luanda from 1641 48, providing a boost for anti Portuguese states.
In 1648 Portugal retook Luanda and initiated a process of military conquest of the Kongo and Ndongo states that ended with Portuguese victory in 1671. Full Portuguese administrative control of the interior didn't occur until the beginning of the 20th century. In 1951 the colony was restyled as an overseas province, also called Portuguese West Africa. When Portugal refused a decolonization process three independence movements emerged:
the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (''Movimento Popular de Liberta o de Angola'' MPLA), with a base among Kimbundu and the mixed race intelligentsia of Luanda, and links to communist parties in Portugal and the Eastern Bloc
the National Liberation Front of Angola (''Frente Nacional de Liberta o de Angola'', FNLA), with an ethnic base in the Bakongo region of the north and links to the United States and the Mobutu regime in Zaire and
the National Union for Total Independence of Angola (''Uni o Nacional para a Independ ncia Total de Angola'', UNITA), led by Jonas Malheiro Savimbi with an ethnic and regional base in the Ovimbundu heartland in the center of the country.
After a 14 year independence guerrilla war, and the overthrow of fascist Portugal's government by a military coup, Angola's nationalist parties began to negotiate for independence in January 1975. Independence was to be declared in November 1975. Almost immediately, a civil war broke out between MPLA, UNITA and FNLA, exacerbated by foreign intervention. South African troops struck an alliance of convenience with UNITA and invaded Angola in August 1975 to ensure that there would be no interference (by a newly independent Angolan state) in Namibia, which was then under South African control (Hodges, 2001, 11). Cuban troops came to the support of the MPLA in October 1975, enabling them to control the capital, Luanda, and hold off the South African forces. The MPLA declared itself to be the de facto government of the country when independence was formally declared in November, with Agostinho Neto as the first President.
In 1976, the FNLA was defeated by a combination of MPLA and Cuban troops, leaving the Marxist MPLA and UNITA (backed by the United States and South Africa) to fight for power.
The conflict raged on, fuelled by the geopolitics of the Cold War and by the ability of both parties to access Angola's natural resources. The MPLA drew upon the revenues of off shore oil resources, while UNITA accessed alluvial diamonds that were easily smuggled through the region's very porous borders (LeBillon, 1999).
In 1991, the factions agreed to turn Angola into a multiparty state, but after the current president Jos Eduardo dos Santos of MPLA won UN supervised elections, UNITA claimed there was fraud and fighting broke out again.
A 1994 peace accord (Lusaka protocol) between the government and UNITA provided for the integration of former UNITA insurgents into the government. A national unity government was installed in 1997, but serious fighting resumed in late 1998, rendering hundreds of thousands of people homeless. President Jos Eduardo dos Santos suspended the regular functioning of democratic instances due to the conflict.
On February 22 2002, Jonas Savimbi, the leader of UNITA, was shot dead and a cease fire was reached by the two factions. UNITA gave up its armed wing and assumed the role of major opposition party. Although the political situation of the country seems to be normalizing, president dos Santos still hasn't allowed regular democratic processes to take place. Among Angola's major problems are a serious humanitarian crisis (a result of the prolonged war), the abundance of minefields, and the actions of guerrilla movements fighting for the independence of the northern exclave of Cabinda (Frente para a Liberta o do Enclave de Cabinda).
Angola, like many sub Saharan nations, is subject to periodic outbreaks of infectious diseases. In April 2005, Angola was in the midst of an outbreak of the Marburg virus which was rapidly becoming the worst outbreak of a haemorrhagic fever in recorded history, with over 237 deaths recorded out of 261 reported cases, and having spread to 7 out of the 18 provinces as of April 19, 2005.
Politics
''Main article: Politics of Angola''
The executive branch of the government is composed of the President, the Prime Minister (currently Fernando da Piedade Dias dos Santos) and Council of Ministers. Currently, political power is concentrated in the Presidency. The Council of Ministers, composed of all government ministers and vice ministers, meets regularly to discuss policy issues. Governors of the 18 provinces are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the president. The Constitutional Law of 1992 establishes the broad outlines of government structure and delineates the rights and duties of citizens. The legal system is based on Portuguese and customary law but is weak and fragmented, and courts operate in only 12 of more than 140 municipalities. A Supreme Court serves as the appellate tribunal a Constitutional Court with powers of judicial review has never been constituted despite statutory authorization.
The 27 year long civil war has ravaged the country's political and social institutions. The UN estimates of 1.8 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), while generally the accepted figure for war affected people is 4 million. Daily conditions of life throughout the country and specifically Luanda (population approximately 4 million) mirror the collapse of administrative infrastructure as well as many social institutions. The ongoing grave economic situation largely prevents any government support for social institutions. Hospitals are without medicines or basic equipment, schools are without books, and public employees often lack the basic supplies for their day to day work.
The president has announced the government's intention to hold elections in 2006. These elections would be the first since 1992 and would serve to elect both a new president and a new National Assembly.
List of political parties in Angola
Administrative Divisions
''Main Article: Provinces of Angola''
Angola is divided into 18 provinces:
border 0
valign "top"
small1 small Bengo
small2 small Benguela
small3 small Bi
small4 small Cabinda
small5 small Cuando Cubango
small6 small Cuanza Norte
small7 small Cuanza Sul
small8 small Cunene
small9 small Huambo
small10 small Huila
small11 small Luanda
small12 small Lunda Norte
small13 small Lunda Sul
small14 small Malanje
small15 small Moxico
small16 small Namibe
small17 small Uige
small18 small Zaire
Geography
, the Angolan capital
''Main article: Geography of Angola''
Angola is bordered by Namibia to the south, Zambia to the east, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north east, and the South Atlantic Ocean to the west. The exclave of Cabinda also borders the Republic of the Congo to the north. Angola's capital, Luanda, lies on the Atlantic coast in the north west of the country.
Angola is divided into an arid coastal strip stretching from Namibia to Luanda a wet, interior highland a dry savanna in the interior south and southeast and rain forest in the north and in Cabinda. The Zambezi River and several tributaries of the Congo River have their sources in Angola.
Exclaves and enclaves
The exclave province of Cabinda borders with both the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The latter's only oceanic access, 60 kilometres (37 mi) in width, divides Angola from Cabinda. The population stands at around 300,000, two thirds of which inhabit the surroundings in a generally stable state on Congolese and Zairian territory. The Angolan central government has yet to put a definitive end to the Cabindese secessionist movement.
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Angola''
Angola is an economy in disarray because of a quarter century of nearly continuous warfare. Despite its abundant natural resources, output per capita is among the world's lowest. Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 85 of the population. Oil production and the supporting activities are vital to the economy, contributing about 45 to GDP and 90 of exports. Control of the oil industry is consolidated in Sonangol Group, a conglomerate which is owned by the Angolan government. Notwithstanding the signing of a peace accord in November 1994, millions of land mines remain, rural violence is a possibility, and many farmers are reluctant to return to their fields. As a result, much of the country's food must still be imported. Despite the increase in the pace of civil warfare in late 1998, the economy grew by an estimated 4 in 1999. The government introduced new currency denominations in 1999, including a 1 and 5 kwanza note. Expanded oil production brightens prospects for 2000, but internal strife discourages investment outside of the petroleum sector. With the advent of peace in 2002 a strategic partnership with China is set in motion, so huge investments by Chinese companies are now in place, especially in the construction sector and more recently in the metallurgical sector.
Demographics
''Main article: Demographics of Angola''
Angola has three main ethnic groups, each speaking a Bantu language: Ovimbundu 37 , Kimbundu 25 , and Bakongo 13 . Other groups include Chokwe (or Lunda), Ganguela, Nhaneca Humbe, Ambo, Herero, and Xindunga. In addition, ''mesti os'' (Angolans of mixed European and African family origins) amount to about 2 , with a small (1 ) population of whites, mainly ethnically Portuguese. Portuguese make up the largest non Angolan population, with at least 30,000 (though many native born Angolans can claim Portuguese nationality under Portuguese law). In 1975, 250,000 Cuban soldiers settled Angola to help the MPLA forces to fight for its independence. These Cubans are of European and Asian (mostly Chinese descent, while others include those of pure African and mulatto descent, who has ancestors in Angola. But in 1989, almost all Cubans went out of the country after a peace agreement has been signed between Angola, Cuba, and South Africa. Portuguese is both the official and predominant language, spoken in the homes of about two thirds of the population, and as a secondary language by many more. Cubans speak Spanish language, but almost none of their descendants speak it.
The great majority of the inhabitants are of Bantu stock with some admixture in the Congo district. In the south east are various tribes of Bushmen. The best known of the Bantu tribes are the Ba Kongo (Ba Fiot), who dwell chiefly in the north, and the Abunda (Mbunda, Ba Bundo), who occupy the central part of the province, which takes its name from the Ngola tribe of Abunda. Another of these tribes, the Bangala, living on the west bank of the upper Kwango, must not be confused with the Bangala of the middle Congo. In the Abunda is a considerable strain of Portuguese blood. The Ba Lunda inhabit the Lunda district. Along the upper Kunene and in other districts of the plateau are settlements of Boers, the Boer population being about 2000. In the coast towns the majority of the white inhabitants are Portuguese. The Mushi Kongo and other divisions of the Ba Kongo retain curious traces of the Christianity professed by them in the 16th and 17th centuries and possibly later. Crucifixes are used as potent fetish charms or as symbols of power passing down from chief to chief whilst every native has a "Santu" or Christian name and is dubbed dom or dona. Fetishism is the prevailing religion throughout the province. The dwelling places of the natives are usually small huts of the simplest construction, used chiefly as sleeping apartments the day is spent in an open space in front of the hut protected from the sun by a roof of palm or other leaves. Despite all that, Catholicism remains the dominant religion, although recently an increasing number of churches are claiming more followers, particularly evangelicals.
List of Angolans
Culture
''Main article: Culture of Angola''
List of writers from Angola
Contemporary Dance Company of Angola
Stamps
List of errors on Portuguese ex Colonies stamps of Angola 1912
List of errors on Portuguese ex Colonies stamps of Angola 1914
List of errors on Portuguese ex Colonies stamps of Angola 1921
List of birds on stamps of Angola
List of people on stamps of Angola
List of bonsai on stamps
List of fish on stamps
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Angola
Foreign relations of Angola
List of Angolan companies
Military of Angola
Sonangol Group
Transport in Angola
See also
List of sovereign states
Reference
''Much of the material in these articles comes from the CIA World Factbook 2000 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website.''
External links
Government
official government portal
official site (in Portuguese)
government information and links
News
News headline links
Government controlled news agency (in Portuguese, French and English)
(in Portuguese) A popular news source in Angola
(in Portuguese) A full news source in Angola and web directory of angolan sites online
(in Portuguese) A popular newspaper in Angola
Overviews
includes Background Notes, Country Study and major reports
Radio Music
Directories
directory category of the WWW VL
directory category
directory category
Tourism
Other
Category:African Union member states
Category:Former Portuguese colonies
Category:CPLP member states
af:Angola
am:
ar:
an:Angola
ast:Angola
bg:
zh min nan:Angola
bn:
bs:Angola
ca:Angola
cs:Angola
da:Angola
de:Angola
et:Angola
el:
es:Angola
eo:Angolo
eu:Angola
fr:Angola
gd:Angola
gl:Angola
ko:
ht:Angola
hr:Angola
io:Angola
id:Angola
ia:Angola
is:Ang la
it:Angola
he:
jv:Angola
ku:Angola
la:Angolia
lv:Angola
lt:Angola
lb:Angola
li:Angola
hu:Angola
mk:
mg:Angola
ms:Angola
na:Angola
nl:Angola
nds:Angola
ja:
no:Angola
nn:Angola
oc:Ang la
pl:Angola
pt:Angola
ro:Angola
ru:
se:Angola
sa:
sq:Angola
sh:Angola
scn:Angola
simple:Angola
sk:Angola
sl:Angola
sr:
fi:Angola
sv:Angola
tl:Angola
vi:Angola
tr:Angola
uk:
zh:
Angola is located on the South Atlantic Coast of West Africa between Namibia and the Republic of the Congo. It also is bordered by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia to the east. The country is divided into an arid coastal strip stretching from Namibia to Luanda a wet, interior highland a dry savanna in the interior south and southeast and rain forest in the north and in Cabinda. The Zambezi River and several tributaries of the Congo River have their sources in Angola. The coastal strip is tempered by the cool Benguela current, resulting in a climate similar to coastal Peru or Baja California. There is a short rainy season lasting from February to April. Summers are hot and dry, while winters are mild. The interior highlands have a mild climate with a rainy season from November through April followed by a cool dry season from May to October. Elevations generally range from 3,000 to 6,000 feet (900 to 1,800 m). The far north and Cabinda enjoy rain throughout much of the year.
The coast is for the most part flat, with occasional low cliffs and bluffs of red sandstone. There is but one deep inlet of the sea Great Fish Bay (or Ba a dos Tigres). Farther north are Port Alexander, Little Fish Bay and Lobito Bay, while shallower bays are numerous. Lobito Bay has water sufficient to allow large ships to unload close inshore. The coast plain extends inland for a distance varying from 30 to 100 miles (48 to 165 km). This region is in general sparsely watered and somewhat sterile. The approach to the great central plateau of Africa is marked by a series of irregular terraces. This intermediate mountain belt is covered with luxuriant vegetation. Water is fairly abundant, though in the dry season obtainable only by digging in the sandy beds of the rivers. The plateau has an altitude ranging from 4000 to 6000 ft (1,200 to 1,800 m). It consists of well watered, wide, rolling plains, and low hills with scanty vegetation. In the east the tableland falls away to the basins of the Congo and Zambezi, to the south it merges into a barren sandy desert. A large number of rivers make their way westward to the sea they rise, mostly, in the mountain belt, and are unimportant, the only two of any size being the Kwanza and the Kunene, separately noticed. The mountain chains which form the edge of the plateau, or diversify its surface, run generally parallel to the coast, as Tala Mugongo (4400 ft., 1350 m), Chella and Vissecua (5250 ft. to 6500 ft. or 1500 to 2000 m). In the district of Benguela are the highest points of the province, viz. Loviti (7780 ft., 2370 m), in 12 5' S., and Mt. Elonga (7550 ft., 2300 m). South of the Kwanza is the volcanic mountain Caculo Cabaza (3300 ft., 1000 m). From the tableland the Kwango and many other streams flow north to join the Kasai River (one of the largest affluents of the Congo), which in its upper course forms for fully 300 mi (490 km). the boundary between Angola and the Congo State. In the south east part of the province the rivers belong either to the Zambezi system, or, like the Okavango, drain to Lake Ngami.
Geology
The rock formations of Angola are met with in three distinct regions:
the littoral zone,
the median zone formed by a series of hills more or less parallel with the coast,
the central plateau.
The central plateau consists of ancient crystalline rocks with granites overlain by unfossiliferous sandstones and conglomerates of Paleozoic age. The outcrops are largely hidden under laterite. The median zone is composed largely of crystalline rocks with granites and some Palaeozoic unfossiliferous rocks. The littoral zone contains the only fossiliferous strata. These are of Tertiary and Cretaceous ages, the latter rocks resting on a reddish sandstone of older date. The Cretaceous rocks of the Dombe Grande region (near Benguella) are of Albian age and belong to the ''Acanthoceras mamillari'' zone. The beds containing ''Schloenbachia inflata'' are referable to the Gault. Rocks of Tertiary age are met with at Dombe Grande, Mossamedes and near Loanda. The sandstones with gypsum, copper and sulfur of Dombe are doubtfully considered to be of Triassic age. Recent eruptive rocks, mainly basalts, form a line of hills almost bare of vegetation between Benguella and Mossamedes. Nepheline basalts and liparites occur at Dombe Grande. The presence of gum copal in considerable quantities in the superficial rocks is characteristic of certain regions.
Location
Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between Namibia and Democratic Republic of the Congo
'''Geographic coordinates:'''
'''Map references:''' Africa
Area
''total:'' 1,246,700 km
''land:'' 1,246,700 km
''water:'' 0 km
Area comparative
Australia comparative: smaller than the Northern Territory
Canada comparative: slightly smaller than the Northwest Territories
United Kingdom comparative: 5 times bigger than the UK
United States comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Capital
Luanda (S o Paulo de Loanda) port railhead
Major Cities
Amboim (Porto Amboim)
Bailundo (Vila Teixeira da Silva)
Benguela (S o Felipe de Benguella) port railhead
Ca la (Vila Robert Williams)
Calandula (Duque de Bragan a)
Camacupa (Vila General Machado)
Chibia (Vila Jo o de Almeida)
Ganda (Vila Mariano Machado)
Huambo (Nova Lisboa) rail
Kuito (Silva Porto)
Kuvango (Vila da Ponte)
Lubango (S da Bandeira)
Lwena (Vila Luso)
Massango (Forte Rep blica)
Mbanza Congo (S o Salvador do Congo)
Menongue (Serpa Pinto) railhead
Namibe (Mo medes) port railhead
N'Dalatando (Vila Salazar) rail
N'Giva (Vila Pereira d'E a)
Saurimo (Vila Henrique de Carvalho)
Soyo (Santo Ant nio do Zaire)
Sumbe (Novo Redondo)
Tombua (Porto Alexandre)
U je (Carmona)
Other Towns in Angola
Land boundaries
''total:'' 5,198 km
''border countries:'' Democratic Republic of the Congo 2,511 km (of which 220 km is the boundary of discontiguous Cabinda Province), Republic of the Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zambia 1,110 km
'''Coastline:''' 1,600 km
'''Maritime claims:'''
''contiguous zone:'' 24 nautical miles (44,5 km)
''exclusive economic zone:'' 200 nautical miles (370 km)
''territorial sea:'' 12 nautical miles (22 km)
Climate
Like the rest of tropical Africa, Angola experiences distinct, alternating rainy and dry seasons. It is semiarid in South and along coast to Luanda North has cool, dry season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to April). In the interior, above 3300 ft. (1000 m), the temperature and rainfall decrease. The plateau climate is healthy and invigorating. The mean annual temperature at S o Salvador do Congo is 22.2 C (72.5 F) at Loanda, 23.3 C (74.3 F) and at Caconda, 19.5 C (67.2 F). The climate is greatly influenced by the prevailing winds, which arc W., S.W. and S.S.W. Two seasons are distinguished the cool, from June to September and the rainy, from October to May. The heaviest rainfall occurs in April, and is accompanied by violent storms.
Terrain
Angola has three principal natural regions: the coastal lowland, characterized by low plains and terraces hills and mountains, rising inland from the coast into a great escarpment and an area of high plains, called the high plateau (planalto), which extends eastward from the escarpment. The highest point in Angola is Morro de Moco, at 2,620 m.
Coastal lowland
The coastal lowland rises from the sea in a series of low terraces. This region varies in width from about 25 kilometers near Benguela to more than 150 kilometers in the Cuanza River Valley just south of Angola's capital, Luanda, and is markedly different from Angola's highland mass. The Atlantic Ocean's cold, northwardflowing Benguela Current substantially reduces precipitation along the coast, making the region relatively arid or nearly so south of Benguela (where it forms the northern extension of the Namib Desert), and quite dry even in its northern reaches. Even where, as around Luanda, the average annual rainfall may be as much as fifty centimeters, it is not uncommon for the rains to fail. Given this pattern of precipitation, the far south is marked by sand dunes, which give way to dry scrub along the middle coast. Portions of the northern coastal plain are covered by thick brush.
Hills and mountains
The belt of hills and mountains parallels the coast at distances ranging from 20 kilometers to 100 kilometers inland. The Cuanza River divides the zone into two parts. The northern part rises gradually from the coastal zone to an average elevation of 500 meters, with crests as high as 1,000 meters to 1,800 meters. South of the Cuanza River, the hills rise sharply from the coastal lowlands and form a high escarpment, extending from a point east of Luanda and running south through Namibia. The escarpment reaches 2,400 meters at its highest point, southeast of the town of Sumbe, and is steepest in the far south in the Serra da Chela mountain range.
High plateau
The high plateau lies to the east of the hills and mountains and dominates Angola's terrain. The surface of the plateau is typically flat or rolling, but parts of the Benguela Plateau and the Humpata Highland area of the Hu la Plateau in the south reach heights of 2,500 meters and more. The Malanje Plateau to the north rarely exceeds 1,000 meters in height. The Benguela Plateau and the coastal area in the immediate environs of Benguela and Lobito, the Bi Plateau, the Malanje Plateau, and a small section of the Hu la Plateau near the town of Lubango have long been among the most densely settled areas in Angola.
Drainage
Most of the country's many rivers originate in central Angola, but their patterns of flow are diverse and their ultimate outlets varied. A number of rivers flow in a more or less westerly course to the Atlantic Ocean, providing water for irrigation in the dry coastal strip and the potential for hydroelectric power, only some of which had been realized by 1988. Two of Angola's most important rivers, the Cuanza and the Cunene, take a more indirect route to the Atlantic, the Cuanza flowing north and the Cunene flowing south before turning west. The Cuanza is the only river wholly within Angola that is navigable for nearly 200 kilometers from its mouth by boats of commercially or militarily significant size. The Congo River, whose mouth and western end form a small portion of Angola's northern border with Zaire, is also navigable.
North of the Lunda Divide a number of important tributaries of the Congo River flow north to join it, draining Angola's northeast quadrant. South of the divide some rivers flow into the Zambezi River and thence to the Indian Ocean, others to the Okavango River (as the Cubango River is called along the border with Namibia and in Botswana) and thence to the Okavango Swamp in Botswana. The tributaries of the Cubango River and several of the southern rivers flowing to the Atlantic are seasonal, completely dry much of the year.
Land use and hazards
'''Natural resources:''' petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper, feldspar, gold, bauxite, uranium
'''Land use:'''
''arable land:'' 2.41
''permanent crops:'' 0.4
''other:'' 97.19 (1999 est.)
'''Irrigated land:''' 750 km (1998 est.)
'''Natural hazards:''' locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on the plateau
Environment current issues
Overuse of pastures and subsequent soil erosion attributable to population pressures desertification deforestation of tropical rain forest, in response to both international demand for tropical timber and to domestic use as fuel, resulting in loss of biodiversity soil erosion contributing to water pollution and silting of rivers and dams inadequate supplies of potable water
'''Environment international agreements:'''
''party to:'' Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73 78)
''signed, but not ratified:'' none of the selected agreements
Flora and fauna
Both flora and fauna are those characteristic of the greater part of tropical Africa. As far south as Benguela the coast region is rich in oil palms and mangroves. In the Northern part of the province are dense forests. In the South towards the Kunene are regions of dense thorn scrub. Rubber vines and trees are abundant, but in some districts their number has been considerably reduced by the primitive methods adopted by native collectors of rubber. The species most common are various root rubbers, notably the ''Carpodinus chylorrhiza''. This species and other varieties of carpodinus are very widely distributed. Landolphias are also found. The coffee, cotton and Guinea pepper plants are indigenous, and the tobacco plant flourishes in several districts. Among the trees are several which yield excellent timber, such as the tacula (''Pterocarpus tinctorius''), which grows to an immense size, its wood being blood red in colour, and the Angola mahogany. The bark of the musuemba (''Albizzia coriaria'') is largely used in the tanning of leather. The mulundo bears a fruit about the size of a cricket ball covered with a hard green shell and containing scarlet pips like a pomegranate. The fauna includes the lion, leopard, cheetah, elephant, giraffe, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, buffalo, zebra, kudu and many other kinds of antelope, wildpig, ostrich and crocodile. Among fish are the barbel, bream and African yellow fish.
'''Geography note:''' the province of Cabinda is an exclave, separated from the rest of the country by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Extreme points
This is a list of the '''extreme points of Angola''', the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.
'''''Angola'''''
Northernmost Point unnamed point on the border with Republic of the Congo (north of the town Caio Bemba, Cabinda province (an Angolan exclave)
Easternmost Point unnamed location on a river section of the border with Zambia (north of the town Sapeta in Zambia), Moxico province
Southernmost Point on the point where the Cunene River section of the border with Namibia terminates at the Caprivi Strip (immediately north of the town Andara in Namibia, Cuando Cubango province
Westernmost Point Ba a dos Tigres island, Namibe Province
'''''Angola (mainland)'''''
Northernmost Point a point on the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo immediately to the north west of the town Luvo, Zaire Province
Easternmost Point unnamed point on a river section of the border with Zambia (north of the town Sapeta in Zambia), Moxico province
Southernmost Point on the point where the Cunene River section of the border with Namibia terminates at the Caprivi Strip (immediately north of the town Andara in Namibia, Cuando Cubango province
Westernmost Point unnamed headland west of Tombua (Porto Alexandre), Namibe
Sources
''Much of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2003 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website.''
See also
Angola
Extreme points of Angola
Angola, Geography of
es:Geograf a de Angola
fr:G ographie de l'Angola
pt:Geografia de Angola
, Data of FAO, year 2005 Number of inhabitants in thousands.
The '''demographics of Angola''' consist of three main ethnic groups, each speaking a Bantu language: Ovimbundu 37 , Kimbundu 25 , and Bakongo 13 . Other groups include Chokwe (or Lunda), Ganguela, Nhaneca Humbe, Ambo, Herero, and Xindunga. In addition, mixed racial (European and Africa) people amount to about 2 , with a small (1 ) population of whites, mainly ethnically Portuguese. Portuguese make up the largest non Angolan population, with at least 30,000 (though many native born Angolans can claim Portuguese nationality under Portuguese law). In 1975, 250,000 Cuban soldiers settled Angola to help the MPLA forces to fight for its independence. These Cubans are of European and Asian (mostly Chinese descent, while others include those of pure African and mulatto descent, who has ancestors in Angola. But in 1989, almost all Cubans went out of the country after a peace agreement has been signed between Angola, Cuba, and South Africa. Cubans speak Spanish language, but almost none of their descendants speak it. Portuguese is both the official and predominant language.
The great majority of the inhabitants are of Bantu Negro stock with some admixture in the Congo district with the pure negro type. In the south east are various tribes of Bushmen. The best known of the Bantu Negro tribes are the Ba Kongo (Ba Fiot), who dwell chiefly in the north, and the Abunda (Mbunda, Ba Bundo), who occupy the central part of the province, which takes its name from the Ngola tribe of Abunda. Another of these tribes, the Bangala, living on the west bank of the upper Kwango, must not be confounded with the Bangala of the middle Congo. In the Abunda is a considerable strain of Portuguese blood. The Ba Lunda inhabit the Lunda district. Along the upper Kunene and in other districts of the plateau are settlements of Boers, the Boer population being about 2000. In the coast towns the majority of the white inhabitants are Portuguese. The Mushi Kongo and other divisions of the Ba Kongo retain curious traces of the Christianity professed by them in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and possibly later. Crucifixes are used as potent fetish charms or as symbols of power passing down from chief to chief whilst every native has a "Santu" or Christian name and is dubbed dom or dona. Fetishism is the prevailing religion throughout the province. The dwelling places of the natives are usually small huts of the simplest construction, used chiefly as sleeping apartments the day is spent in an open space in front of the hut protected from the sun by a roof of palm or other leaves.
Demographic data from the CIA World Factbook
for Angola
Population
:11,190,786 (July 2005 est.)
Age structure
:0 14 years: 43.4 (male 2,454,209 female 2,407,083)
:15 64 years: 53.7 (male 3,059,339 female 2,955,060)
:65 years and over: 2.8 (male 139,961 female 175,134) (2005 est.)
Median age
:Total: 18.12 years
:Male: 18.12 years
:Female: 18.11 years (2005 est.)
Population growth rate
:1.9 (2005 est.)
Birth rate
:44.64 births 1,000 population (2005 est.)
Death rate
:25.9 deaths 1,000 population (2005 est.)
Net migration rate
:0.28 migrant(s) 1,000 population (2005 est.)
Sex ratio
:At birth: 1.05 male(s) female
:Under 15 years: 1.02 male(s) female
:15 64 years: 1.04 male(s) female
:65 years and over: 0.8 male(s) female
:Total population: 1.02 male(s) female (2005 est.)
Infant mortality rate
:Total: 191.19 deaths 1,000 live births
:Male: 203.68 deaths 1,000 live births
:Female: 178.07 deaths 1,000 live births (2005 est.)
Life expectancy at birth
:Total population: 36.61 years
:Male: 36 years
:Female: 37.25 years (2005 est.)
Total fertility rate
:6.27 children born woman (2005 est.)
HIV AIDS
:Adult prevalence rate: 3.9 (2003 est.)
:People living with HIV AIDS: 240,000 (2003 est.)
:Deaths: 21,000 (2003 est.)
Major infectious diseases
:Degree of risk: very high
:Food or waterborne diseases: bacterial and protozoal diarrhea, hepatitis A, typhoid fever
:Vectorborne diseases: malaria, African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) are high risks in some locations
:Respiratory disease: meningococcal meningitis
:Water contact disease: schistosomiasis (2004)
Nationality
:Noun: Angolan(s)
:Adjective: Angolan
Ethnic groups
:Ovimbundu 37 , Kimbundu 25 , Bakongo 13 , mestico (mixed European and native African) 2 , European 1 , other 22
Religions
:Indigenous beliefs 47 , Roman Catholic 38 , Protestant 15 (1998 est.)
Languages
:Portuguese (official), Bantu and other African languages
Literacy
:Definition: age 15 and over can read and write
:Total population: 42
:Male: 56
:Female: 28 (1998 est.)
References
''Much of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2005 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website.''
Category:Geography of Angola
Category:Angolan society
Angola
Angola changed from a one party Marxist Leninist system ruled by the MPLA to a formal multiparty democracy following the 1992 elections. President dos Santos won the first round election with more than 49 of the vote to Jonas Savimbi's 40 . A runoff never has taken place. The subsequent renewal of civil war and collapse of the Lusaka Protocol have left much of this process stillborn, but democratic forms exist, notably the National Assembly.
Currently, political power is concentrated in the Presidency. The executive branch of the government is composed of the President, the Prime Minister (currently Fernando da Piedade Dias dos Santos) and Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers, composed of all government ministers and vice ministers, meets regularly to discuss policy issues. Governors of the 18 provinces are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the president. The Constitutional Law of 1992 establishes the broad outlines of government structure and delineates the rights and duties of citizens. The legal system is based on Portuguese and customary law but is weak and fragmented. Courts operate in only 12 of more than 140 municipalities. A Supreme Court serves as the appellate tribunal a Constitutional Court with powers of judicial review has never been constituted despite statutory authorization.
The 26 year long civil war has ravaged the country's political and social institutions. The UN estimates of 1.8 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), while generally the accepted figure for war affected people is 4 million. Daily conditions of life throughout the country and specifically Luanda (population approximately 4 million) mirror the collapse of administrative infrastructure as well as many social institutions. The ongoing grave economic situation largely prevents any government support for social institutions. Hospitals are without medicines or basic equipment, schools are without books, and public employees often lack the basic supplies for their day to day work.
Executive branch
President
Jos Eduardo dos Santos
MPLA
21 September 1979
Prime Minister
Fernando da Piedade Dias dos Santos "Nando"
MPLA
6 December 2002
The president is elected for a five year term by the people. The Council of Ministers appointed by the president.
Legislative branch
The '''National Assembly''' (''Assembleia Nacional'') has 220 members, elected for a four year term, 130 members by proportional representation and 90 members in provincial districts. The next elections, due for 1997, have been put off indefinitely.
Political parties and elections
The president has announced the government's intention to hold elections in 2006. These elections would be the first since 1992 and would serve to elect both a new president and a new National Assembly.
Judicial branch
Supreme Court or Tribunal da Relacao, judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the president
Administrative divisions
Angola has eighteen provinces (provincias, singular provincia) Bengo, Benguela, Bie, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango, Cuanza Norte, Cuanza Sul, Cunene, Huambo, Huila, Luanda, Lunda Norte, Lunda Sul, Malanje, Moxico, Namibe, Uige, Zaire
Political pressure groups and leaders
Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda or FLEC N'zita Henriques TIAGO Antonio Bento BEMBE
''note:'' FLEC is waging a small scale, highly factionalized, armed struggle for the independence of Cabinda Province
International organization participation
ACP, AfDB, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, G 77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt (signatory), ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, SADC, UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
pt:Pol tica de Angola
Angola's is the fastest growing economy in Africa, largely due to a major oil boom, but it also ranks in the bottom 10 of socioeconomic conditions in the world. Aside from the oil sector and diamonds, it is in economic disarray because of 26 years of nearly continuous warfare. Despite abundant natural resources, output per capita remains among the world's lowest. Subsistence agriculture and dependence on humanitarian food assistance sustain the large majority of the population. Little industry exists.
By contrast, the rapidly expanding petroleum industry now producing up to 800,000 barrels (127,000 m) per day, behind only Nigeria in Africa, accounts for more than 60 of GNP and 90 of government revenues. Oil production remains largely offshore and has few linkages with other sectors of the economy. Block Zero, located of the enclave of Cabinda, provides the majority of Angola's crude oil production. There, ChevronTexaco, through its subsidiary Cabinda Gulf Oil Company, is the operator with a 39.2 share, with SONANGOL (the Angolan state oil company), Total, and ENI Agip splitting up the rest. ChevronTexaco also operates Angola's first producing deepwater section, Block 14, which started pumping in January 2000. The U.S. takes more than half of Angola's production, by far the largest importer. Exports to Asian countries have grown rapidly in recent years, however, especially China. Significant discoveries have been made on deepwater Blocks 15, 17, 18, and 24, with ExxonMobil, BP, Statoil, Norsk Hydro, and Agip having major interests. Total operates Angola's one refinery (in Luanda) as a joint venture with SONANGOL plans for a second refinery in Lobito are moving forward.
In the last decade of the colonial period, Angola was a major African food exporter but now is forced to import almost all its food. Because of severe wartime conditions, including extensive planting of landmines throughout the countryside, agricultural activities have been brought to a near standstill. Some efforts to recover have gone forward, however, notably in fisheries. Coffee production, though a fraction of its pre 1975 level, is sufficient for domestic needs and some exports. In sharp contrast to a bleak picture of devastation and bare subsistence is expanding oil production, now almost half of GDP and 90 of exports, at 800,000 barrels (127,000 m) a day. Diamonds make up most of the remaining exports and have provided much of the revenue for Jonas Savimbi's UNITA rebellion through illicit trade. Other rich resources await development: gold, forest products, fisheries, iron ore, coffee, and countless fruits.
An economic reform effort was launched in 1998. In April 2000, Angola started an International Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Monitored Program (SMP). The program formally lapsed in June 2001, but the IMF remains engaged. In this context, the Government of Angola has succeeded in unifying exchange rates and has raised fuel, electricity, and water rates. The Commercial Code, telecommunications law, and Foreign Investment Code are being modernized. A privatization effort, prepared with World Bank assistance, has begun with the BCI bank. Nevertheless, a legacy of fiscal mismanagement and corruption persists.
Angola is the third largest trading partner of the United States in Sub Saharan Africa, largely because of its petroleum exports. The U.S. imports about 4 of its oil from Angola, a share which should continue to increase. By the same token, U.S. companies account for more than half the investment in Angola, with Chevron Texaco leading the way. The U.S. exports industrial goods and services primarily oilfield equipment, mining equipment, chemicals, aircraft, and food to Angola, while principally importing petroleum.
'''Economy overview:''' Angola is an economy in disarray because of a quarter century of nearly continuous warfare and corruption. Despite its abundant natural resources, output per capita is among the world's lowest. Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 85 of the population. Oil production and the supporting activities are vital to the economy, contributing about 45 to GDP and 90 of exports. Notwithstanding the signing of a peace accord in November 1994, violence continues, millions of land mines remain, and many farmers are reluctant to return to their fields. As a result, much of the country's food must still be imported. To take advantage of its rich resources gold, diamonds, extensive forests, Atlantic fisheries, and large oil deposits Angola will need to implement the peace agreement and reform government policies. Despite the increase in the pace of civil warfare in late 1998, the economy grew by an estimated 4 in 1999. The government introduced new currency denominations in 1999, including a 1 and 5 kwanza note. Expanded oil production brightens prospects for 2000, but internal strife discourages investment outside of the petroleum sector.
Angola
Communications in Angola:
Telephony
Telephone service is limited mostly to government and business use. 96,300 main lines were reported to be in use in 2003, and 130,000 mobile cellular lines were reported in 2002. HF radiotelephone is used extensively for military links.
The domestic system consists of a limited system of wire. It also uses microwave radio relay and tropospheric scatter.
The international country code for Angola is 244. Angola has 2 Intelsat satellite earth stations for communications across the Atlantic Ocean. Fiber optic submarine cable (SAT 3 WASC) provides connectivity to Europe and Asia.
Radio
:'''Broadcast stations''': AM 21, FM 6, shortwave 7 (2000)
:'''Radios''': 630,000 (1997)
Television
:'''Broadcast stations''': 6 (2000)
:'''Televisions''': 150,000 (1997)
Internet
:'''Internet hosts''': 17 (2003)
:'''Internet users''': 200,000 (2002)
:'''ISO 3166 1 alpha 2 country code''': AO
Reference
CIA World Factbook 2004
'''Transportation in Angola''' comprises:
Railways
''total:'' 2,761 km
''narrow gauge:'' 2,638 km 1.067 m gauge 123 km 0.600 m gauge (2002)
there are three separate lines which do not link up. A fourth system linked Gunza and Gabela.
railways in Angola have suffered a lot of damage in the civil war, and a 4b project is proposed to restore the lines, and even to extend the system. A link to Namibia is partly under construction.
Railway links to adjacent countries
The major railway in Angola is the Benguela railway, severely damaged during the civil war after independence.
Congo no Lobito Lubumbashi restoration link proposed.
Namibia no same gauge links proposed and partially under construction in 2005.
Zambia no
Highways
''total:'' 76,626 km
''paved:'' 19,156 km
''unpaved:'' 57,470 km (1997 est.)
Waterways 1,295 km navigable
Pipelines
crude oil 179 km
Ports and harbors
Atlantic Ocean
from North to South
Ambriz
Cabinda
Luanda railhead for Malanje
Lobito railhead for Congo
Malongo
Namibe railhead for Menongue
Porto Amboim
Soyo
Merchant marine
''total:'' 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) 30,311 GRT 48,924 DWT
''ships by type:'' cargo 7, petroleum tanker 1 (2002 est.)
Airports 243 (2002)
Airports with paved runways
''total:'' 32
''over 3,047 m:'' 4
''2,438 to 3,047 m:'' 8
''1,524 to 2,437 m:'' 14
''914 to 1,523 m:'' 5
''under 914 m:'' 1 (2002 est.)
Airports with unpaved runways
''total:'' 211 (2002)
''over 3,047 m:'' 2
''2,438 to 3,047 m:'' 4
''1,524 to 2,437 m:'' 30
''914 to 1,523 m:'' 95
''under 914 m:'' 80 (2002 est.)
National Airline
TAAG Air Angola
Reference
''This article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2003.''
See also
Angola
Military
color CC3300
age 17 years of age for compulsory military service conscript service obligation 2 years plus time for training (2001)
availability 2,423,221 (2005 est.)
service 1,174,548 (2005 est.)
reaching age 121,254 (2005 est.)
active
amount 183.58 million (2004)
percent GDP 10.6 (2004)
Angola's military is called the FAA, the Portuguese acronym for Angolan Armed Forces, headed by a Chief of Staff who reports to the Minister of Defense. There are three divisions the '''Army''', Navy ('''Marinha de Guerra''', MdG), and '''Air and Air Defense Forces''' (FANA). Total manpower is about 110,000. The army is by far the largest of the services with about 100,000 men and women. The navy numbers about 3,000 and operates several small patrol craft and barges. Air force personnel total about 7,000 its equipment includes Russian manufactured fighters and transport planes. A small number of FAA personnel are stationed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Kinshasa) and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville).
References
''CIA World Factbook'', 2005
''U.S. Department of State Background Notes'', 2003
Category:Military of Angola
Angola
Froom 1975 to 1989, Angola was aligned with the Eastern bloc, in particular the Soviet Union and Cuba. Since then, it has focused on improving relationships with Western countries, cultivating links with other Portuguese speaking countries, and asserting its own national interests in Central Africa through military and diplomatic intervention. In 1993, it established formal diplomatic relations with the United States. It has entered the Southern African Development Community as a vehicle for improving ties with its largely anglophone neighbors to the south. Zimbabwe and Namibia joined Angola in its military intervention in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where Angolan troops remain in support of the Joseph Kabila government. It also has intervened in the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) to support the existing government in that country.
Since 1998, Angola has successfully worked with the UN Security Council to impose and carry out sanctions on UNITA. More recently, it has extended those efforts to controls on conflict diamonds, the primary source of revenue for UNITA. At the same time, Angola has promoted the revival of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP) as a forum for cultural exchange and expanding ties with Portugal and Brazil in particular.
'''Disputes international:''' Angola gives shelter to thousands of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo while thousands of Angolan refugees still remain in neighboring states as a consequence of the protracted civil wars in both states
'''Illicit drugs:''' Angola is used as a transshipment point for cocaine destined for Western Europe and other African states
Reference
''Much of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2003 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website.''
'''Albert Sidney Johnston''' (February 2, 1803 April 6, 1862) was a career U.S. Army officer and a Confederate general during the American Civil War. Considered by Confederate President Jefferson Davis to be the finest general in the Confederacy, he was killed early in the war at the Battle of Shiloh.
Early life
Johnston was born in Washington, Kentucky, the youngest son of Dr. John and Abigail Harris Johnston. His father was a native of Salisbury, Connecticut. Although Albert Johnston was born in Kentucky, he lived much of his life in Texas, which he considered his home. He was educated at Transylvania University in Lexington and later secured an appointment to West Point. In 1826 he graduated eighth in his class from the United States Military Academy with a commission as a second lieutenant in the 2nd U.S. Infantry. He was assigned to posts in New York and Missouri and served in the Black Hawk War in 1832 as chief of staff to General Henry Atlinson. In 1829 he married Henrietta Preston. He resigned his commission in 1834 to return to Kentucky to care for his dying wife. They had one son, William Preston Johnston.
Texas Army
In April 1834, Johnston took up farming in Texas, but enlisted as a private in the Texas Army during the Texas War of Independence against the Republic of Mexico in 1836. One month later, Johnston was promoted to major and the position of aide de camp to General Sam Houston. He was named Adjutant General as a colonel in the Republic of Texas Army on August 5, 1836. On January 31, 1837, he became Senior Brigadier General in command of the Texas Army.
On February 7, 1837, he fought in a duel with Texas Brig. Gen. Felix Huston, challenging each other for the command of the Texas Army Johnston refused to fire on Huston and lost the position after he was wounded in the pelvis. The second president of the Republic of Texas, Mirabeau B. Lamar, appointed him Secretary of War on December 22, 1838. Johnston was to provide the defense of the Texas border against Mexican invasion, and in 1839 conducted a campaign against Indians in northern Texas. In February 1840, he resigned and returned to Kentucky, where he married Eliza Griffin in 1843. They settled on a large plantation he named China Grove in Brazoria County, Texas.
U.S. Army
Johnston returned to the Texas Army during the Mexican American War under General Zachary Taylor as a colonel of the 1st Texas Rifle Volunteers. The enlistments of his volunteers ran out just before the Battle of Monterrey. Johnston managed to convince a few volunteers to stay and fight as he himself served as the inspector general of volunteers and fought at the battles of Monterrey and Buena Vista. Johnston remained on his plantation after the war until he was appointed by President Zachary Taylor to the U.S. Army as a major and was made a paymaster in December of 1849. He served in that role for more than five years, making six tours, and traveling more than 4,000 miles annually on the Indian frontier of Texas. He served on the Texas frontier and elsewhere in the West. In 1855 President Franklin Pierce appointed him colonel of the 2nd (now 5th) Cavalry, a new regiment, which he organized. As a key figure in the Utah War, he led U.S. troops who established a non Mormon government in the formerly Mormon territory. He received a brevet promotion to brigadier general in 1857 for his service in Utah. He spent 1860 in Kentucky until December 21, when he sailed for California to take command of the Department of the Pacific.
Civil War
At the outbreak of the Civil War, Johnston was the commander of the U.S. Army Department of the Pacific in California. He was approached by some Californians who urged him to take his forces east to join the Union against the Confederacy. He resigned his commission, April 9, 1861, as soon as he heard of the secession of Texas. He remained in California until June. After a rapid march through the deserts of Arizona and Texas, he reached Richmond, Virginia, on or about September 1, 1861. There Johnston was appointed a general by his friend, Jefferson Davis. On May 30, 1861, Johnston became the second highest ranking Confederate General (after the little known Samuel Cooper) as commander of the Western Department. He raised the Army of Mississippi to defend Confederate lines from the Mississippi River to Kentucky and the Allegheny Mountains.
Although the Confederate Army won a morale boosting victory at First Bull Run in the East in 1861, matters in the West turned ugly by early 1862. Johnston's subordinate generals lost Fort Henry on February 6, 1862, and Fort Donelson on February 16, 1862, to Union Brig. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant. Johnston has been faulted for poor judgment in selecting Gens. Tilghman and Floyd for those crucial positions and for not supervising adequate construction of the forts. And Union Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell captured the vital city of Nashville, Tennessee. Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard was sent west to join Johnston and they organized their forces at Corinth, Mississippi, planning to ambush Grant's forces at Pittsburg Landing, Tennessee.
Shiloh
Johnston concentrated many of his forces from around the theater and launched a massive surprise attack against Grant at the Battle of Shiloh on April 6, 1862. As the Confederate forces overran the Union camps, Johnston seemed to be everywhere, personally leading and rallying troops up and down the line. At about 2:30 p.m., while leading one of those charges, he was wounded, taking a bullet behind his right knee. He did not think the wound serious at the time, and sent his personal physician to attend to some wounded Union soldiers instead. The bullet had in fact clipped his popliteal artery and his boot was filling up with blood. Within a few minutes Johnston was observed by his staff to be nearly fainting off of his horse, and asked him if he was wounded, to which he replied "Yes, and I fear seriously." It is possible that Johnston's duel in 1837 had caused nerve damage or numbness to that leg and that he did not feel the wound to his leg as a result. Johnston was taken to a small ravine, where he bled to death in minutes.
Ironically, it is probable that a Confederate soldier fired the fatal round. No Union soldiers were observed to have ever gotten behind Johnston during the fatal charge, while it is known that many Confederates were firing at the Union lines while Johnston charged well in advance of his soldiers. He was the highest ranking casualty of the war and his death was a strong blow to the morale of the Confederacy. Jefferson Davis considered him the best general in the country this was two months before the emergence of Robert E. Lee as their pre eminent general.
Epitaph
Johnston was buried in New Orleans, Louisiana. In 1866, a joint resolution of the Texas Legislature was passed to have his body reinterred to the Texas State Cemetery in Austin (the re interment occurred in 1867). Four decades later, the state appointed Elisbet Ney to design a monument and sculpture of him to be erected at his gravesite.
The Texas Historical Commission has erected a historical marker near the entrance of what was once his plantation. An adjacent marker was erected by the San Jacinto Chapter of the Daughters of The Republic of Texas and the Lee, Roberts, and Davis Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederate States of America.
References
Eicher, John H., Eicher, David J.: ''Civil War High Commands'', Stanford University Press, 2001, ISBN 0 8047 3641 3.
External links
Further reading
Gott, Kendall D,, ''Where the South Lost the War: An Analysis of the Fort Henry Fort Donelson Campaign, February 1862'', Stackpole Books, 2003, ISBN 0 8117 0049 6.
Johnson, William Preston, ''The Life of Albert Sidney Johnston'', New York, 1878.
Nofi, Albert A. ''The Alamo and the Texas War for Independence'' Da Capo Press ISBN: 0 306 81040 9.
Roland, Charles P., ''Albert Sidney Johnston: Soldier of Three Republics'', Austin, 1964.
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Johnston, Albert
Johnston, Albert
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Category:Texas
Johnston, Albert Sidney
Johnston, Albert Sidney
ca:Albert S. Johnston
de:Albert S. Johnston
hr:Albert Sidney Johnston
nl:Albert Sidney Johnston
The '''Arctic Ocean''', located mostly in the north polar region, is the smallest of the world's five oceans, and the shallowest. Even though IHO recognizes it as an ocean, oceanographers may call it ''the Arctic Mediterranean Sea'' or simply ''the Arctic Sea'', classifying it as one of the mediterranean seas of the Atlantic Ocean.
Geography
The Arctic Ocean occupies a roughly circular basin and covers an area of about 14,090,000 km (5,440,000 mi), slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US. The coastline length is 45,389 km. Nearly landlocked, it is surrounded by the land masses of Eurasia, North America, Greenland, and a number of islands. It includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea, East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, White Sea and other tributary bodies of water. It is connected to the Pacific Ocean by the Bering Strait and to the Atlantic Ocean through the Greenland Sea.
An underwater ocean ridge, the Lomonosov Ridge, divides the Arctic Ocean into two basins: the Eurasian, or Nansen, Basin, which is between 4,000 and 4,500 m (13,000 and 15,000 ft) deep, and the North American, or Hyperborean, Basin, which is about 4,000 m deep. The topography of the ocean bottom is marked by fault block ridges, plains of the abyssal zone, ocean deeps, and basins. The average depth of the Arctic Ocean is 1,038 m (3,407 ft), in part due to the large extent of continental shelf extant on the Eurasian side .
s and nuclear submarines.
The greatest inflow of water comes from the Atlantic by way of the Norwegian Current, which then flows along the Eurasian coast. Water also enters from the Pacific via the Bering Strait. The East Greenland Current carries the major outflow. Temperature and salinity vary seasonally as the ice cover melts and freezes. Ice covers most of the ocean surface year round, causing subfreezing temperatures much of the time. The Arctic is a major source of very cold air that inevitably moves toward the equator, meeting with warmer air in the middle latitudes and causing rain and snow. Little marine life exists where the ocean surface is covered with ice throughout the year. Marine life abounds in open areas, especially the more southerly waters. The ocean's major ports are the Russian cities of Murmansk and Arkhangelsk (Archangel). The Arctic Ocean is important as the shortest air route between the Pacific coast of North America and Europe overflies it.
Major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea (northern access to the Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait) strategic location between North America and Russia shortest marine link between the extremes of eastern and western Russia floating research stations operated by the US and Russia maximum snow cover in March or April about 20 to 50 centimeters over the frozen ocean snow cover lasts about 10 months.
Geographic coordinates:
Climate
thumb Extent of the Arctic ice pack in September, 1978 2002
thumb Extent of the Arctic ice pack in February, 1978 2002
Polar climate characterized by persistent cold and relatively narrow annual temperature ranges winters characterized by continuous darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and clear skies summers characterized by continuous daylight, damp and foggy weather, and weak cyclones with rain or snow.
There is considerable seasonal variation in how much pack ice covers the Arctic Ocean.
Elevation extremes
''lowest point:'' Fram Basin 4,665 m (according to , the Arctic Ocean's Eurasian Basin deepest point is at 5,450 m (17,881 ft))
''highest point:'' sea level 0 m
Natural resources
Oil and gas fields, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules, sand and gravel aggregates, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales).
The political dead zone near the center of the sea is also at the center of a mounting dispute between the United States, Russia, Canada, Norway, and Denmark. It is considered significant because of its potential to contain as much as or more than a quarter of the world's oil and gas resources, the tapping of which could greatly alter the flow of the global energy market.
Natural hazards
Ice islands occasionally break away from northern Ellesmere Island icebergs calved from glaciers in western Greenland and extreme northeastern Canada permafrost on islands virtually ice locked from October to June ships subject to superstructure icing from October to May.
Environment current issues
Endangered marine species include walruses and whales fragile ecosystem slow to change and slow to recover from disruptions or damage thinning polar icepack seasonal hole in ozone layer over the North Pole.
Reduction of the area of Arctic sea ice will have an effect on the planet's albedo, thus possibly affecting global warming. Many scientists are presently concerned that warming temperatures in the Arctic may cause large amounts of fresh, Arctic Ocean meltwater to enter the North Atlantic, possibly disrupting global ocean current patterns. Potentially severe changes in the Earth's climate might then ensue.
Ports and harbors
Churchill, Manitoba (Canada),
Inuvik, (Canada)
Prudhoe Bay, (US)
Barrow, (US)
Pevek, (Russia)
Tiksi, (Russia),
Dikson (Russia),
Dudinka, (Russia),
Murmansk (Russia),
Arkhangelsk (Russia)
Kirkenes, (Norway)
Vard , (Norway)
Transportation note
Sparse network of air, ocean, river, and land routes the Northwest Passage (North America) and Northern Sea Route (Eurasia) are important seasonal waterways.
Exploration
The first surface crossing of the Arctic Ocean was led by Wally Herbert in 1969, in a dogsled expedition from Alaska to Svalbard with air support. See also Northwest Passage, Open Polar Sea.
References
Bibliography:
Neatby, Leslie H., ''Discovery in Russian and Siberian Waters'' 1973 ISBN 0821401246
Ray, L., and Stonehouse, B., eds., ''The Arctic Ocean'' 1982 ISBN 0333310179
Thor n, Ragnar V. A., ''Picture Atlas of the Arctic'' 1969 ISBN 0821401246
Based on public domain text by US Naval Oceanographer: http: oceanographer.navy.mil arctic.html
See also
North Pole
External links
Interactive map of the Greater Arctic, including shaded relief and bathymetry of the Arctic Ocean.
Comprehensive Arctic Resource with data, photos, maps, essays on key Arctic issues, and much more.
Plot and download ocean observations
Viewable interdisciplinary, diverse collection of Arctic variables from different geographic regions and data types.
Images from Web Cams deployed in Spring on an ice floe in the middle of the Arctic Ocean.
Data from instruments deployed on an ice floe in the middle of the Arctic Ocean.
Category:Oceans
Category:Seas
Category:Arctic
ar:
an:Ozi n Artico
zh min nan:Pak ke k i
bn:
br:Meurvor skornek Arktika
ca:Oce rtic
cv:
cs:Severn ledov oce n
cy:Cefnfor Arctig
da:Ishavet
de:Arktischer Ozean
et:P hja J meri
el:
es:Oc ano Glacial rtico
eo:Arkta Oceano
fr:Oc an Arctique
gl:Oc ano rtico
ko:
io:Arktika Oceano
id:Samudra Arktik
ia:Oceano Arctic
it:Mare Glaciale Artico
he:
la:Oceanus Arcticus
lt:Arkties vandenynas
hu:Jeges tenger
mk:
nl:Arctische Oceaan
ja:
no:Nordishavet
nn:Nordishavet
pl:Ocean Arktyczny
pt:Oceano rtico
ru:
simple:Arctic Ocean
sk:Severn adov oce n
sl:Arkti ni ocean
sr:
fi:Pohjoinen j meri
sv:Norra ishavet
ta:
th:
tr:Arktik Okyanusu
uk:
zh:
, portrayed by Brent Spiner, from the TV series ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'' An '''android''' is an artificially created robot, an automaton, that resembles a human being usually both in appearance and behavior. The word derives from the Greek ''andr '', " meaning "man, male", and the suffix '' eides'', used to mean "of the species alike" (from ''eidos'' "species"). The word ''droid'', a robot in the ''Star Wars'' universe, is derived from this meaning.
In the semantic sense the word "android" is a misnomer. The intended meaning is "an artificial human being like being", while the literal translation is "an artificial male being". The word ''andros'' has definite meaning of "male human being" in Greek, while the word ''man'' can mean either "male human being" or "human being in general". The gender neutral word for human being in Greek is ''anthropos'', and the correct word for an artificial human being like automaton would be anthropoid.
TOC
Usage and distinctions
Unlike the terms ''robot'' (a "mechanical" being) and ''cyborg'' (a being that is partly organic and partly mechanical), the word ''android'' has been used in literature and other media to denote several different kinds of artificially constructed beings:
a robot that closely resembles a human
a cyborg that closely resembles a human
an artificially created, yet primarily organic, being that closely resembles a human
Although human morphology is not necessarily the ideal form for working robots, the fascination in developing robots that can mimic it can be found historically in the assimilation of two concepts: ''simulacra'' (devices that exhibit likeness) and ''automata'' (devices that have independence).
The term android was first used by the French author Mathias Villiers de l'Isle Adam (1838 1889) in his work ''Tomorrow's Eve'', featuring an artificial human like robot named Hadaly. As said by the officer in the story, "In this age of Realien advancement, who knows what goes on in the mind of those responsible for these mechanical dolls."
Although Karel apek's robots in ''R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots)'' (1921)the play that introduced the word "robot" to the worldwere organic artificial humans, the word ''robot'' has come to primarily refer to mechanical humans, animals, and other beings. The term android can mean either one of these, while a cyborg ("cybernetic organism" or "bionic man") would be a creature that is a combination of organic and mechanical parts.
Ambiguity
Historically, science fiction authors have used "android" in a greater diversity of ways than the terms "robot" and "cyborg". In some fiction works, the primary difference between a robot and android is only skin deep, with androids being made to look almost exactly like humans on the outside, but with internal mechanics exactly the same as that of robots. In other stories, authors have defined android to indicate a wholly organic, yet artificial, creation. Other definitions of android fall somewhere in between.
The character Data, from the television series ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'', is described as an android. Data became intoxicated in an early episode ("The Naked Now") and is later referred to having "bioplast sheeting" for skin ("The Most Toys"), perhaps suggesting that he was initially intended by the writers to be at least partially organic. Otherwise, Data was shown to be mechanical throughout and this often became a central plot theme.
The Replicants from the movie ''Blade Runner'' were bioengineered organic beings. While they were not referred to as either robots or androids in the movie, the screenplay was originally based on a novel by Philip K. Dick called ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?''
In the video game Beneath a Steel Sky, genetically engineered androids similar to Blade Runner's Replicants are a central plot theme. However, despite their organic makeup, their behavior is programmed by computer.
The robots of apek's ''R.U.R.'' were organic in nature. Today, an author writing a similar story might very well be inclined to call them androids.
The character Ash in the movie ''Alien'', another artificial organic being, is often referred to as an android (though not in the dialogue of the movie itself). Similarly, the character Bishop in ''Aliens'' and ''Alien '' is a more advanced android commonly called a Synthetic, but prefers to be called an "artificial person". Much later in the series timeline, the character Call in ''Alien Resurrection'' is ashamed of being an android.
C 3PO and R2 D2 from the Star Wars movies are referred to as ''droids''. While C 3PO could reasonably be called an android because he is humanoid in appearance, the squat cylinder R2 D2 is only humanoid in behavior.
In the movie ''A.I.'', the robotic characters are called ''mechanoids'', but the film is loosely based on a short story written by Brian Aldiss called "Supertoys Last All Summer Long", in which the central character David is called an android (by which Aldiss seemed to be referring to an organic creation).
In the anime manga Chobits, Androids are known as "Persicoms", essentially computers in a man made body. The series does not go into their internal composition, but it is assumed to be artificial with a very realistic outside. One of the key points of this series was a special type of persicom named a "Chobit", a persicom that had free will and the ability to fall in love and have emotions.
Androids in fiction
Thus far, androids have remained mostly within the domain of science fiction and, frequently, in film and television. However, some "humanoid robots" exist.
One of the earliest android characters is Otho from the Captain Future stories of Edmond Hamilton. Otho's construction is never discussed but he is much more human like than his companion Grag, a mechanical robot.
Isaac Asimov's robot stories are mostly about androids many are collected in ''I, Robot'' (1950). They promulgated a set of rules of ethics for androids and robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) that greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject. Most of Asimov's robots appear too artificial to be mistaken for human beings, with the notable exceptions of R. Jander Panell, R. Daneel Olivaw and Andrew Martin.
Perhaps the most famous android is Data, played by actor Brent Spiner, of the series ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'' (19871994) and several spin off motion pictures this character was largely inspired by another android character created by Gene Roddenberry for ''The Questor Tapes''. Data's immediate 'family' brothers Lore and B 4 et al., daughter Lal, and 'mother' Dr. Juliana Tainer were also androids (and the fembots are properly, though rarely, referred to as gynoids) from the same creator, Dr. Noonien Soong.
Earlier in ''Star Trek: The Motion Picture'' (1979), the Ilia probe a precisely duplicated biomechanical drone of Lieutenant Ilia, with some of her emotions intact was dispatched by V'ger to gather information about the crew of the starship ''Enterprise''.
In the TV series ''Gene Roddenberry's Andromeda'' (20002005), the gynoid Rommie is an extension of the starship's AI operating system, represented by an avatar of Rommie.
In the re imagined series ''Battlestar Galactica'' (2003), the gynoid Number Six is one of a (seductive) variant of the antagonistic, robotic Cylons that is used to infiltrate the fleeing human Colonial forces and, particularly, the mind of the scientist Dr. Gaius Baltar.
Androids (Jinzou Ningen in Japanese meaning 'artificial human') are also a race in ''Dragon Ball'', ''Dragon Ball Z'', and ''Dragon Ball GT''. The androids' names were only numbers (such as Android 13 or Android 20). They were created by Dr. Gero, Dr. Muu, and the Red Ribbon Army. Some are entirely artificial and some are created from humans and can be considered cyborgs.
Jinzo Ningen Kikaider was the first manga and tokusatsu series to feature an android protagonist.
The series Xenosaga borrows Villiers' original term Realian when referring to a race of beings created by Vector Corporation. Two playable characters are androids (MOMO and KOS MOS). One is refered to as a Realian while the second is simply an android.
In their respective series by Capcom, Mega Man was initially called a "humanoid", which was then simplified to robot. X, a later version, is said to be more advanced, more independent of thought, and closer to an android. Other beings, based off his design, are called Reploids.
Many more examples may be found in this list of fictional robots.
References
Kerman, Judith B. (1991). ''Retrofitting Blade Runner: Issues in Ridley Scott's Blade Runner and Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?''. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press. ISBN 0879725095
Shelde, Per (1993). ''Androids, Humanoids, and Other Science Fiction Monsters: Science and Soul in Science Fiction Films''. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 0814779301
Sidney Perkowitz (2004) Joseph Henry Press. ISBN 0309096197
See also
Animatronic
Cyborg
Domestic robot
Muscle wire
Robot
Sex doll
Realdoll
Statuephilia
Gynoid
Artificial intelligence
Humanoid
Humanoid robot
Transhumanism
Repliee Q1
External links
.
Category:Science fiction themes
Category:Robots
cs:Android
de:Android
es:Androide
fr:Andro de
it:Androide
he:
nl:Andro de
pt:Andr ide
ja:
pl:Android
sv:Android
uk:
Canadian province or territory
Name Alberta
AlternateName
Fullname Province of Alberta
EntityAdjective Provincial
Flag Flag of Alberta.svg
CoatOfArms AlbertaCoatofArms.png
Map Alberta map.png
Motto Fortis et Liber (Latin: Strong and free)
OfficialLang English
Capital Edmonton
LargestCity Calgary
Flower Wild Rose (also known as prickly rose
Premier Ralph Klein
PremierParty PC
Viceroy Norman Kwong
ViceroyType Lieutenant Governor
PostalAbbreviation AB
PostalCodePrefix T
AreaRank 6supth (provinces and territories) sup
TotalArea 661,848
LandArea 642,317
WaterArea 19,531
PercentWater 2.95
PopulationRank 4supth sup
Population 3,223,400
PopulationYear 2005
DensityRank 6supth sup
Density 4.63
AdmittanceOrder 8supth sup (province)
AdmittanceDate September 1, 1905 (split from Northwest Territories)
TimeZone UTC 7
HouseSeats 28
SenateSeats 6
ISOCode CA AB
Website www.gov.ab.ca
'''Alberta''' is one of Canada's provinces. It celebrated 100 years as a province on September 1, 2005.
Alberta is located in western Canada. It is bounded on the west by the province of British Columbia, on the north by the Northwest Territories, on the east by the province of Saskatchewan, and on the south by the United States of America (State of Montana).
Alberta's capital is the city of Edmonton, located just south of the centre of the province. The most populous city and metropolitan area is Calgary. Calgary is also the province's busiest transportation hub (for road, air, and rail) and is one of Canada's major commerce centres. Other major municipalities include Red Deer, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Fort McMurray, Grande Prairie, Camrose, Lloydminster, Wetaskiwin, Banff, and Jasper. See also: List of communities in Alberta.
The Premier of the province is Hon. Ralph Klein, Progressive Conservative. See also List of Alberta Premiers.
Alberta is named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (1848 1939), the fourth daughter of Queen Victoria. Princess Louise was also the wife of Sir John Campbell, who was the Governor General of Canada from 1878 1883. Lake Louise was also named in honour of Princess Louise.
Geography
:''Main article: Geography of Alberta''
Alberta is in western Canada, and covers an area of 661,190 km (255,287 mi ). To the south, it borders the US state of Montana at a latitude of 49 N, or the 49th Parallel. To the east at a longitude of 110 W, it borders the province of Saskatchewan. At 60 N, it is bordered by the Northwest Territories. To the west, its border with British Columbia follows the line of peaks of the Rocky Mountains range along the Continental Divide, which runs northwesterly until it reaches 120 W, at which point the border follows this meridian to 60 N.
With the exception of the southeastern section, the province is well watered. Alberta contains dozens of rivers and lakes ideal for swimming, water skiing, fishing and a full range of other water sports. There are a multitude of fresh water lakes, each less than 260km situated in Alberta, and three of more considerable size. These three larger lakes are Lake Athabasca (7898km ), part of which lies in the province of Saskatchewan, Lake Claire (1436km ), which lies just west of Lake Athabasca in Wood Bufflao National Park, and Lesser Slave Lake (1168km ), which is well northwest of Edmonton.
As Alberta extends for 1200km from north to south, and about 600km wide at its greatest east west extent, it is natural that the climate should vary considerably between the 49th and 60th parallels. It is also further influenced by altitude, especially in the southwestern part of the province within the Canadian Rockies and adjacent areas directly to the east.
Northern Alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has fewer frost free days than southern Alberta, which is often semi arid due to the summer heat and much lower rainfall. Western Alberta is protected by the mountains, and enjoys the warmth brought by winter chinook winds, while southeastern Alberta is flat, dry prairie, where temperatures can range from very cold (35 C (31 F) in the winter) to very hot (35 C (95 F) or higher in the summer). Central and parts of northwestern Alberta in the Peace River region are largely aspen parkland, a biome transitional between prairie to the south and boreal forest to the north. After southern Ontario, Central Alberta is the most likely region in Canada to experience tornadoes. Thunderstorms, some of them severe, are frequent in the summer, especially in central and southern Alberta. The region surrounding the Calgary Edmonton Corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in Canada.
Overall, Alberta has cold winters, with a daytime average of about 10 C (14 F) in the south to 24 C (12 F) in the north. In the summer, the daytime temperature averages from about 13 C (55 F) in the Rocky Mountains to 19 C (67 F) in the dry prairie to the south east. The northern and western parts of the province experience higher rainfall and lower evaporation rates caused by cooler summer temperatures.
Alberta's capital city, Edmonton, is located almost in the geographic centre of the province, and most of Alberta's oil is refined here. Southern Alberta, where Calgary is located, is known for its ranching. Much of the unforested part of Alberta is given over either to grain or to dairy farming, with ranching predominantly a southern Alberta industry.
! Unsourced image removed: terrain at the Dinosaur Provincial Park
In southeastern Alberta, where the Red Deer River traverses the flat prairie and farmland, are the Alberta badlands with deep gorges and striking landforms. Dinosaur Provincial Park, near Drumheller, Alberta, showcases the badlands terrain, desert flora, and remnants from Alberta's past when dinosaurs roamed the then lush landscape.
Alberta is one of only two Canadian provinces to have no maritime coast (the other being the neighbouring province of Saskatchewan.)
Largest municipalities and metro areas by population
table border 0 cellpadding 2 cellspacing 2 width 50
th Municipality
th 2005
th 2001
th 1996
trtd'''Census Metropolitan Areas:'''
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdCalgary CMAtd1,060,300 td951,395td821,628
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdEdmonton CMAtd1,016,000 td937,845td862,597
trtd'''Cities (10 Largest):'''
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdCalgarytd956,078td878,866td768,082
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdEdmontontd712,391td666,104td616,306
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdRed Deertd79,082td67,707td60,080
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdLethbridgetd77,202td67,374td63,053
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdSt. Albert small(included in Edmonton CMA) smalltd56,318td53,081td46,888
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdMedicine Hattd56,048td51,249td46,783
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdGrande Prairietd44,631td36,983td31,353
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdAirdrie small(included in Calgary CMA) smalltd27,069td20,382td15,946
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdSpruce Grove small(included in Edmonton CMA) smalltd18,405td15,983td14,271
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdCamrosetd15,850td14,854td13,728
trtd'''Districts (3 Largest):'''
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdStrathcona County small(included in Edmonton CMA) smalltd80,232td71,986td64,176
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdRegional Municipality of Wood Buffalotd73,176td41,466td35,213
tr bgcolor d3d3d3tdMunicipality of Rocky View small(included in Calgary CMA) smalltd30,688 td28,441td23,326
b
table
small''Sources: All 2005 figures are based on official 2005 census data from municipalities. Where no 2005 data is available, ''( )'' indicates the most recent official data from either the municipality or the 2001 Statistics Canada federal census. All data for 2001 and 1996 is from the respective federal census.'' small
small''( ) indicates 2005 CMA estimates according to '' small
small''Although the city of Lloydminster has a total population of 23,632, it is not included on the list because the city straddles the Alberta Saskatchewan border. Only 15,487 people live on the Alberta side, which would make it Alberta's 11th largest city.'' small
Industry
:''Main article: Industry in Alberta''
Alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil, synthetic crude, natural gas and gas products in the country. Two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in North America are located in central and north central Alberta. In both Red Deer and Edmonton, world class polyethylene and vinyl manufacturers produce products shipped all over the world, and Edmonton's oil refineries provide the raw materials for a large petrochemical industry to the east of Edmonton.
The Athabasca Oil Sands (previously known as the Athabasca Tar Sands) have estimated oil reserves in excess of that of the rest of the world, estimated to be 1.6 trillion barrels (254 km ). With the advancement of extraction methods, bitumen and economical synthetic crude are produced at costs nearing that of conventional crude. This technology is Alberta grown and developed. Many companies employ both conventional strip mining and non conventional methods to extract the bitumen from the Athabasca deposit. With current technology, only 315 billion barrels (50 km ) are recoverable. Fort McMurray, one of Canada's youngest and liveliest cities, has grown up entirely because of the large multinational corporations which have taken on the task of oil production.
Another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the Tar Sands is the price of oil. In 2005, record oil prices have made it more than profitable to extract this oil, which in the past would give little profit or even a loss.
While Edmonton is considered the pipeline junction, manufacturing, chemical processing, research and refining centre of the province, Calgary is known for its senior and junior oil company head offices (unlike Edmonton, Calgary is not close to any large sources of oil).
With concerted effort and support from the provincial government, several high tech industries have found their birth in Alberta, notably the invention and perfection of liquid crystal display systems. With a growing economy, Alberta has several financial institutions dealing with several civil and private funds.
Agriculture and forestry
Agriculture has a significant position in the province's economy. Over 5 million cattle are residents of the province at one time or another, and Alberta beef has a healthy worldwide market. Nearly one half of all Canadian beef is produced in Alberta. Alberta is one of the prime producers of plains buffalo (bison) for the consumer market. Sheep for wool and mutton are also raised.
Wheat and canola are primary farm crops, with Alberta leading the provinces in spring wheat production, with other grains also prominent. Much of the farming is dryland farming, often with fallow seasons interspersed with cultivation. Continuous cropping (in which there is no fallow season) is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion. Across the province, the once common grain elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreased and farmers now truck the grain to central points.
Alberta is the leading beekeeping province of Canada, with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially designed barns in southern Alberta, then migrating north during the summer into the Peace River valley where the season is short but the working days are long for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed. Hybrid canola also requires bee pollination, and some beekeepers service this need.
The vast northern forest reserves of softwood allow Alberta to produce large quantities of lumber and plywood, and several northern Alberta plants supply North America and the Pacific Rim nations with bleached wood pulp and newsprint.
Government
:''See also: Politics of Alberta''
Edmonton is the seat of government of Alberta. It is a parliamentary democracy. Its unicameral legislature the Legislative Assembly consists of 83 members. As Canada's head of state, Queen Elizabeth II is the Government of Alberta's chief executive. Her duties in Alberta are carried out by Lieutenant Governor, Norman Kwong. The government is headed by the Premier, Ralph Klein. The city of Edmonton is Alberta's government capital.
The province's revenue comes mainly from the taxation of oil, natural gas, beef, softwood lumber, and wheat, but also includes grants from the federal government primarily for infrastructure projects. Albertans are the lowest taxed people in Canada, and Alberta is the only province in Canada without a provincial sales tax (though residents are still subject to the federal sales tax, the GST). Alberta's municipalities have their own governments which (usually) work in co operation with the provincial government.
Alberta's politics are much more conservative than those of other Canadian provinces. Alberta has traditionally had three political parties, the Progressive Conservatives ("Conservatives" or "Tories"), the centrist Liberals, and the social democratic New Democrats. A fourth party, the strongly conservative Social Credit Party, was a power in Alberta for many decades, but fell from the political map after the Progressive Conservatives came to power in the early 1970s. Since that time, no other political party has governed Alberta. In fact, only three parties have governed Alberta: the United Farmers of Alberta the Social Credit Party, and the currently governing Progressive Conservative Party
As is the case with many western Canadian provinces, Alberta has had occasional bouts of separatist sentiment. Even during the 1980s, when these feelings were at their strongest, there has never been enough interest in secession to initiate any major movements or referenda. There are a number of groups wishing to promote the independence of Alberta in some form currently active in the province. See also: Alberta separatism.
In the 2004 provincial election, held in November, the Alberta Alliance Party, running to the right of the Conservatives, won one seat.
See also: List of Alberta Premiers, List of Alberta general elections
Education
As with any Canadian province, the Alberta government is the highest authority in education, creating and regulating the school boards, public colleges, universities, and other educational institutions.
K 12
The vast majority of Alberta's schools are run by publicly funded school boards (each with its own district of authority). The largest are English language Public school boards. Alberta also has English Separate Catholic boards throughout the province, which serve a substantial minority of students. There is one protestant school board in part of the province. Where numbers warrant, there are francophone school boards (Public and Separate Catholic). All five of these types of boards are primarily publicly funded (basic school fees range from 200 750 depending on the school board) by local property taxes and provincial grants given on an equal per student basis by the province (with some adjustments). The different types of school boards are a necessity under the Canadian constitution, which guarantees the francophones and Catholic communities both the right to their own schools, and the right to administer them.
! Image with unknown copyright status removed:
Some other Canadian provinces have reformed their school systems on non religious lines, by seeking a constitutional amendment, but Alberta has not. Often the decision to go to one system or another is not based on religion, but a parent's belief of which system provides a better education.
Starting in 1994, the province has allowed some chartered schools to operate, independently of any district school board, reporting directly to the province. Homeschooling is officially recognized and partially funded from within the Alberta school system.
Originally in Alberta, school boards had the power to levy property taxes within their respective districts. However, this meant districts with a low tax base were underfunded, so the province moved to a system that pools the education property tax, and distributes it based on student population and need.
Post secondary
Alberta's oldest and largest university is Edmonton's University of Alberta. The University of Calgary, once affiliated with the University of Alberta, gained its autonomy in 1966, and is now the second largest university in Alberta. There is also Athabasca University, which focuses on distance learning, and the University of Lethbridge. There are 15 colleges that receive direct public funding, along with two technical institutes, NAIT and SAIT (). Students may also receive government loans and grants while attending selected private institutions.
Transportation
Alberta has over 180,000km of highways and roads, of which nearly 50,000km are paved. The main north south corridor is Highway 2, which begins south of Cardston at the Carway border crossing. Highway 4, which effectively extends U.S. Interstate Highway 15 into Alberta and is the busiest U.S. gateway to the province, begins at the Coutts border crossing and ends at Lethbridge. Highway 3 joins Lethbridge to Fort Macleod and links Highway 4 to Highway 2. Highway 2 travels northward through Fort Macleod, Calgary, Red Deer, and Edmonton before dividing into two highways. One continues northwest as Highway 43 into Grande Prairie and the Peace River country the other (Highway 63) travels northeast to Fort McMurray, the location of the Athabasca Oil Sands. Highway 2 is supplimented by two more highways that run parallel to it: highway 22, west of highway 2, known as 'the cowboy trail', and highway 21, east of highway 2.
Alberta has two main east west corridors. The southern corridor, part of the Trans Canada Highway system, enters the province near Medicine Hat, runs westward through Calgary, and leaves Alberta through Banff National Park. The northern corridor, also part of the Trans Canada network but known alternatively as the Yellowhead Highway (Highway 16), runs west from Lloydminster in eastern Alberta, through Edmonton and Jasper National Park into British Columbia. On a sunny spring or fall day, one of the most scenic drives in the world is along the Icefields Parkway, which runs some 300km between Jasper and Banff, with mountain ranges and glaciers on either side of its entire length.
Urban stretches of Alberta's major highways and freeways are often called ''trails''. For example, Highway 2 is Deerfoot Trail as it passes through Calgary, Calgary Trail as it leaves Edmonton southbound, and St. Albert Trail as it leaves Edmonton northbound toward the city of St. Albert. Visitors from outside Alberta often find this disconcerting, accustomed as they are to the notion that a trail is an unpaved route primarily for pedestrians.
Edmonton, Calgary, Red Deer, Medicine Hat, and Lethbridge have substantial mass transit systems. Edmonton and Calgary also operate light rail vehicles.
Alberta is well connected by air, with international airports at both Edmonton and Calgary. Calgary's airport is the larger of the two, and is also the fourth busiest in Canada. It is a hub airport for a significant proportion of the connecting trans border and international flights into and out of central Canada. There are over 9000km of operating mainline railway, and many tourists see Alberta aboard Via Rail or Rocky Mountain Railtours.
Culture
:''Main article: Culture of Alberta''
Alberta is well known for its warm and outgoing friendliness and frontier spirit.
Summer brings many festivals to the province. Edmonton's Fringe Festival is the world's second largest after Edinburgh's. Alberta also hosts some of Canada's largest folk festivals, multicultural festivals, and heritage days (to name a few). Calgary is also home to Carifest, the second largest Caribbean festival in the nation (after Caribana in Toronto). These events highlight the province's cultural diversity and love of entertainment. Most of the major cities have several performing theatre companies who entertain in venues as diverse as Edmonton's Arts Barns and the Francis Winspear Centre.
Alberta also has a large ethnic population. Both the Chinese and East Indian communities are significant. According to Statistics Canada, Alberta is home to the second highest proportion (two percent) of Francophones in western Canada (after Manitoba). Many of Alberta's French speaking residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province. As reported in the 2001 census, the Chinese represented nearly four percent of Alberta's population and East Indians represented better than two percent. Both Edmonton and Calgary have Chinatowns and Calgary's is Canada's third largest. Aboriginal Albertans make up approximately three percent of the population.
The major contributors to Alberta's ethnic diversity have been the European nations. Forty four percent of Albertans are of British and Irish descent, and there are also large numbers of Germans, Ukrainians, and Scandinavians.
Both cities heavily support first class Canadian Football League and National Hockey League teams. Soccer, rugby union and lacrosse are also played professionally in Alberta.
Tourism is also important to Albertans. A million visitors come to Alberta each year just for Calgary's world famous Stampede and for Edmonton's Klondike Days. Edmonton was the gateway to the only all Canadian route to the Yukon gold fields, and the only route which did not require gold seekers to travel the exhausting and dangerous Chilkoot Pass.
Visitors throng to Calgary for ten days every July for a taste of "Stampede Fever". As a celebration of Canada's own Wild West and the cattle ranching industry, the Stampede welcomes around 1.2 million people each year. Only an hour's drive from the Rocky Mountains, Calgary also makes a visit to tourist attractions like Banff National Park something which can easily be done in a day. Calgary and Banff each host nearly 5 million tourists yearly.
Alberta is an important destination for tourists who love to ski and hike Alberta boasts several world class ski resorts. Hunters and fishermen from around the world are able to take home impressive trophies and tall tales from their experiences in Alberta's wilderness.
Demographics
Alberta has enjoyed a relatively high rate of growth in recent years, due in large part to its burgeoning economy. Between 2003 and 2004, the province saw high birthrates (on par with some larger provinces such as British Columbia), relatively high immigration, and a high rate of interprovincial migration when compared to other provinces . As of 2005, the population of the province was 3,212,813 (''Albertans''). 81 of this population lives in urban areas and 19 is rural. The Calgary Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and one of the densest in Canada. Many of Alberta's cities and towns have also experienced very high rates of growth in recent history.
Population of Alberta since 1901
border "1" cellpadding "2"
!Year
!Population
!Five Year br change
!Ten Year br change
!Percentage of br Canadian Pop.
1901 73,022 n a n a 1.4
1911 374,295 n a 412.6 5.2
1921 588,454 n a 57.2 6.7
1931 731,605 n a 24.3 7.0
1941 796,169 n a 8.8 6.9
1951 939,501 n a 18.0 6.7
1961 1,331,944 n a 41.8 7.3
1971 1,627,874 n a 22.2 7.5
1981 2,237,724 n a 37.5 9.2
1986 2,365,825 5.7 n a 9.3
1991 2,545,553 7.6 13.8 9.3
1996 2,696,826 5.9 14.0 9.3
2001 2,974,807 10.3 16.9 9.9
Racially and ethnically, the province is predominantly Caucasian. 88.8 of the population is either white or Aboriginal (Aboriginals represent a fairly small proportion of this percentage, however). This number is significantly smaller in many of the cities, particularly Calgary and Edmonton which are home to a much larger number of visible minorities.
'''Visible Minorities'''
3.3 Chinese
2.3 Asian
1.1 Black
1.1 Filipino
Most Albertans identify as Christians. Nevertheless, many people in the province observe other faiths or do not profess to a religion at all. Alberta has a somewhat higher percentage of evangelical Christians than do other provinces. Conversely, Alberta also has the second highest percentage of Non religious residents in Canada (after British Columbia).
The Mormons of Alberta reside primarily in the extreme south of the province. There are temples in both Cardston and Edmonton. Many Alberta Mormons descend from Mormon pioneers who emigrated from Utah around the turn of the 20th century. Alberta also has a large Hutterite population, a communal Anabaptist sect similar to the Mennonites, and a significant population of Seventh day Adventists in and around the Lacombe area due to the presence of the Canadian University College.
Many people of the Hindu, Sikh, and Muslim faiths also make Alberta their home one of the largest Sikh temples in Canada is located just outside of Edmonton.
'''Religion'''
Protestant: 38.9
Roman Catholic: 26.7
No Affiliation: 23.6
Christian Orthodox: 1.5
other Christian: 4.1
Muslim: 1.5
Buddhist: 1.1
History
:''Main article: History of Alberta''
The present province of Alberta, as far north as about 53 north latitude, was a part of Rupert's Land from the time of the incorporation of the Hudson's Bay Company (1670). After the arrival in the North West of the French around 1731 they settled the prairies of the west, establishing communities such as Lac La Biche and Bonnyville. Fort La Jonqui re was established near what is now Calgary in (1752). The North West Company of Montreal occupied the northern part of Alberta territory before the Hudson's Bay Company arrived from Hudson Bay to take possession of it. The first explorer of the Athabasca region was Peter Pond, who, on behalf of the North West Company of Montreal, built Fort Athabasca on Lac La Biche in 1778. Roderick Mackenzie built Fort Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca ten years later in 1788. His cousin, Sir Alexander Mackenzie followed the North Saskatchewan River to its northernmost point near Edmonton, then setting northward on foot, trekked to the Athabasca River, which he followed to Lake Athabasca. It was there he discovered the mighty outflow river which bears his name the Mackenzie River which he followed to its outlet in the Arctic Ocean. Returning to Lake Athabasca, he followed the Peace River upstream, eventually reaching the Pacific Ocean, and so being the first white man to cross the North American continent north of Mexico.
The district of Alberta was created as part of the North West Territories in 1882. As settlement increased, local representatives to the North West Legislative Assembly were added. After a long campaign for autonomy, in 1905 the district of Alberta was enlarged and given provincial status.
Fauna and flora
Fauna
The three climatic regions (alpine, forest, and prairie) of Alberta are home to many different species of animals. The south and central prairie was the land of the bison, its grasses providing a great pasture and breeding ground for millions of buffalo. The buffalo population was decimated during early settlement, but since then buffalo have made a strong comeback, and thrive on farms and in parks all over Alberta.
Alberta is home to many large carnivores. Among them are the grizzly and black bears, which are found in the mountains and wooded regions. Smaller carnivores of the dog and cat families include coyotes, wolves, fox, lynx, bobcat and mountain lion (cougar).
Bighorn Sheep
Herbivorous, or plant eating animals, are found throughout the province. Moose and deer (both mule and white tail varieties) are found in the wooded regions, and pronghorn antelope can be found in the prairies of southern Alberta. Bighorn sheep and mountain goats live in the Rocky Mountains. Rabbits, porcupines, skunks, squirrels, and many species of rodents and reptiles live in every corner of the province. Alberta is fortunate in that it is home to only one variety of venomous snake, the prairie rattlesnake.
Central and northern Alberta and the region farther north is the nesting ground of the migratory birds. Vast numbers of ducks, geese, swans, and pelicans arrive in Alberta every spring and nest on or near one of the hundreds of small lakes that dot northern Alberta. Eagles, hawks, owls, and crows are plentiful, and a huge variety of smaller seed and insect eating birds can be found. Alberta, like other temperate regions, is home to mosquitoes, flies, wasps, and bees. Rivers and lakes are well stocked with pike, walleye, white fish, rainbow, speckled, and brown trout, and even sturgeon. Turtles are found in some water bodies in the southern part of the province. Frogs and salamanders are a few of the amphibians that make their homes in Alberta.
Flora
In central and northern Alberta the arrival of spring brings the prairie anemone, the avens, crocuses, and other early flowers. The advancing summer introduces many flowers of the sunflower family, until in August the plains are one blaze of yellow and purple. The southern part of Alberta is covered by a short grass, very nutritive, but dries up as summer lengthens, to be replaced by hardy perennials such as the buffalo bean, fleabane, and sage. Both yellow and purple clover fill the roadways and the ditches with their beauty and aromatic scents. The trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and belts on the hillsides. These are largely deciduous, typically birch, poplar, and tamarack. Many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain. On the north side of the North Saskatchewan River evergreen forests prevail for hundreds of thousands of square kilometres. Aspen poplar, balsam poplar (or cottonwood), and paper birch are the primary large deciduous species. Conifers include Jack pine, Rocky Mountain pine, Lodgepole pine, both white and black spruce, and the deciduous conifer tamarack.
See also
Family Law Act
External links
(A site offering info on tax, census info, and economic development of large and small Albertan Communities)
br
af:Alberta
bg:
zh min nan:Alberta
ca:Alberta
da:Alberta
de:Alberta (Kanada)
et:Alberta
es:Alberta
eo:Alberto
fa:
fr:Alberta
ko:
io:Alberta
id:Alberta
is:Alberta (fylki)
it:Alberta
he:
ka:
la:Alberta
nl:Alberta
ja:
no:Alberta
pl:Alberta (prowincja Kanady)
pt:Alberta
ro:Alberta
ru:
simple:Alberta
sk:Alberta
fi:Alberta
sv:Alberta
vi:Alberta
tr:Alberta
uk: ( )
zh:
:''For the fast food restaurant chain, see Arctic Circle Restaurants''
marking the location of the Arctic Circle
The '''Arctic Circle''' is one of the five major circles of latitude that mark maps of the Earth. This is the parallel of latitude that (in 2000) runs 66 33' 39" north of the Equator. Everything north of this circle is known as the Arctic, and the zone just to the south of this circle is the Northern Temperate Zone.
The Arctic Circle marks the southern extremity of the polar day of the summer solstice in June and the polar night of the winter solstice in December. Within the Arctic Circle, the arctic Sun is above the horizon for at least 24 continuous hours once per year, in conjunction with the Arctic's Summer Solstice this is often referred to in local vernacular as midnight sun. Likewise, in conjunction with the Arctic's Winter Solstice, the Arctic sun will be below the horizon for at least 24 continuous hours.
(In fact, because of refraction and because the sun appears as a disk and not a point, part of the midnight sun may be seen at the night of the summer solstice up to about 50' (90 km) south of the geometric arctic circle similarly, at the day of the winter solstice part of the sun may be seen up to about 50' north of the geometric arctic circle. This is true at sea level these limits increase with elevation above sea level, however in mountainous regions there is often no direct view of the horizon.)
The position of the Arctic Circle is determined by the axial tilt (angle) of the polar axis of rotation of the Earth on the ecliptic. This angle is not constant, but has a complex motion determined by many cycles of short to very long periods. Due to nutation the tilt oscillates over 9" (about 280 m on the surface) over a period of 18.6 years. The main long term cycle has a period of 41000 years and an amplitude of about 0.68 , or 76 km on the surface. Currently the tilt is decreasing by about 0.47" per year, so the Arctic Circle is moving north by about 14 m per year. Also see precession.
Countries which have significant territory within the Arctic Circle are:
Russia
Canada
Denmark (Greenland)
United States of America (Alaska)
Norway
Sweden
Finland
The country of Iceland also has territory within the Arctic Circle, but less than 1 sq km. This area is on a few small islets, of which only Gr msey (which lies directly on the Arctic Circle) is inhabited.
See also
Antarctic Circle
Circumpolar arctic
External links
Lapland and Arctic Circle
Historical essay about early expeditions to the Canadian arctic, illustrated with maps, photographs and drawings
Category:Arctic
Category:Geography of Nunavut
Category:Geography of the Northwest Territories
Category:Lines of latitude
cs:Severn pol rn kruh
de:Polarkreis
el:
eo:Arkta Cirklo
es:C rculo polar rtico
fr:Cercle Arctique
no:Den nordlige polarsirkel
pl:Koo podbiegunowe
pt:C rculo polar rtico
sv:Polcirkeln
wa:Ceke polaire artike
zh:
(U.S.). This version was adopted in 1982
An '''assault rifle''' is a type of automatic rifle generally defined as a selective fire rifle or carbine (depending on the particular firearm's size), using intermediate powered ammunition. They are categorized between the larger and heavier light machine gun and the weaker submachine gun. Assault rifles are the standard small arm in most modern armies, having largely replaced or suplemented the larger, more powerful rifles of the past.
The name is a literal translation of the German term ''Sturmgewehr'' or "storm weapon", first applied to the Sturmgewehr 44, developed during World War II. It gradually became a popular term for this type of firearm. The term has since been retro actively applied to earlier weapons with similar traits.
History
1900s to the 1930s: Light automatic rifles using rifle cartridges
Federov Avtomat (Russia). The weapon fired the Japanese rifle cartridge.
''These automatic firearms tended to use used pre existing rifle cartridges, kinetic energy ranged between 3,0005,000 J (2,2003,700 foot pounds), velocites of 750900 m s (2,4602,950 ft s) and bullets of 9 to 13 g (139200 grains).''
The first true assault rifle was probably the Italian made Cei Rigotti, which was developed in the 1890s and finished around 1900, at the beginning of the 20th century it never entered military service, however. The first service assault rifle was the Russian Federov Avtomat of 1916, chambered for the Japanese Arisaka 6.5 50 mm rifle cartridge, which was only used in small numbers due to supply problems.
The Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR) was a World War I era weapon that used a full power round. It was an automatic rifle by today's definition, and designed for single accurate shots and suppressive automatic fire. The weight of roughly 15 pounds (7 kg) meant that it was rather cumbersome for closer quarters. Later developments added heavier barrels and bipods that lent it to being used as more like today's light machine gun or squad automatic weapon, though it did help establish the doctrine of use for light selective fire rifles. The BAR was produced in large numbers, widely adopted, and served into the 1960s with the U.S. military and other nations. While it did not use an intermediate cartridge, it was an intermediate weapon between the newly adopted submachine guns and heavier machine guns such as the Lewis Gun.
During WWI, a few weaker submachine guns also entered service, such as the Villar Perosa, the Berretta 1918 and the MP18. These weapons fired rounds based of pistols 9 mm Glisenti and 9 mm Bergmann. The 9 mm Bergman was based on the 9 mm Parabellum, with reduced charge to reduce recoil in the MP18. The developers of the Thompson submachine gun (also developed during the 1910s) originally intended to use rifle powered rounds. However, a mechanical system that could handle their power was not found and it ended up using the .45 ACP cartridge. These firearms are considered part of the submachine gun class, but were an important part in the development of the assault rifles.
1930s: Automatic intermediate weapons
''Some of these automatic and semi automatic firearms used new intermediate cartridges others used pre existing rounds.''
An attempt to provide soldiers with a rifle with intermediate power ammunition that was heavier than a submachine gun (too weak, with short range due to the pistol ammunition), but lighter than a long rifle (uncomfortable to fire, and difficult to control on fully automatic mode due to the powerful ammunition more expensive to design and manufacture), by the Italian arms company Beretta resulted in the MAB 38 (''Moschetto Automatico Beretta 1938''). The MAB 38 used a Fiocchi ''9M38'' cartridge and a higher powered 9 mm Parabellum cartridge, which could provide longer range fire. The effective range was about 200 m, although it was declared to be effective up to 500 m. The MAB 38 was a multipurpose weapon.
(U.S.). Unlike the M1, the later M2 and M3 were fully automatic
In 1938, prior to World War II, the United States introduced the M1 Carbine, which was an intermediate power weapon chambered for the .30 Carbine cartridge. The M1 Carbine was originally planned to have automatic fire, but this was dropped from the first version, although later in the war, selective fire variants were made (M2 and M3 Carbines). The weapon had higher stopping power than submachine guns, but was not as powerful as full size automatic rifles such as the BAR. The longer barrel (18 inch) provided the carbine with higher muzzle velocity than pistols and submachine guns chambered for the same .30 round.
The M1 Carbine series was designed for close quarters engagements, a concept that would be re applied later. It marked the first time in which such an intermediate weapon would be mass produced in such large numbers it became the most produced American weapon of the war, with millions made. The M1 Carbine series would remain in service with the U.S. military until replaced by the M16 rifle in the 1960s it continued to be used in other nations.
1940s and 1950s: Maschinenkarabiner, Sturmgewehr, the AK 47
(Germany). Its development began in earnest with the Maschinenkarabiner project
''Some of these automatic firearms used pre existing rounds others used new intermediate cartridges. Kinetic energy ranged between 1,4002,100 J (1,0331,550 foot pounds), muzzle velocities of 600800m s (1,9702,625 ft s) and bullets of 79g (108139 grains).''
Germany, like other countries, had studied the problem since World War I, and their factories made a variety of non standard cartridges, therefore having less incentive to retain their existing calibers. The 7.92 30 mm cartridge was an example of these experiments in 1941, it was improved to 7.92 33 mm ''Infanterie Kurz Patrone'' ("Infantry Short Standard"). In 1942, it was again improved as ''Maschinenkarabiner Patrone S'', and in 1943, ''Pistolen Patrone 43mE'' then, finally, ''Infanterie Kurz Patrone 43''. It is just a coincidence, but the intermediate cartridge developed by Winchester for the M1 Carbine, developed slightly before, also measured 33 mm.
In 1942, Walther presented the ''Maschinenkarabiner'' ("automatic carbine", abbr. MKb), named MKb42(W). In the same year, Haenel presented the MKb42(H), designed by Hugo Schmeisser as a result of this program. Rheinmetall Borsig (some said Krieghoff) presented its FG 42 (''Fallschirmjaeger Gewehr 42'', sponsored by Hermann G ring) though this was in a different role, and using a heavy 8 57 mm (8 mm Mauser) cartridge, which was not an intermediate round. War time tests in Russia indicated the MKb42(H) performed better than the other two. Schmeisser developed it first as the MP43, then MP43 1, and finally as the MP44 Sturmgewehr 44 (abbreviated StG44). It immediately entered large scale production. More than 5,000 units had been produced by February 1944, and 55,000 by the following November.
Following the end of the war, the Soviet Union developed the AK 47, which was vaguely similar in concept and layout to the German StG44, but extremely different mechanically. It fired the 7.62 39 mm cartridge, which had been developed during WWII. The round was similar to the StG44's in that the bullet was of a similar caliber to the Russian rifle ammunition.
1960s and 1970s: Lighter automatic weapons and lighter smaller bullets
''Many of these automatic firearms used intermediate cartridges with much lighter bullets and smaller calibers, but fired at very high velocity, kinetic energy ranged between 13001800J (9601,330 foot pounds), velocities of 9001050m s (2,9503,450 ft s), and bullets of 34g (4662 grains).''
(Swiss). The SIG fires Gw Pat.90, which has the same caliber as the 5.56 mm NATO
Many nations continued the development of traditional high powered rifles with ranges of 500 meters (550 yards) and beyond. Most designs of this period used low caliber but high velocity ammunition, with some experiments in flechettes and other exotic ammunition.
Statistical studies of World War II battles performed by the U.S. Army revealed that infantry combat beyond 300 meters (325 yards) was rare. The Russians saw no reason to make a rifle that shot beyond a rifleman's ability to aim. Therefore, a lighter, less powerful cartridge could be effective. This permitted a lighter rifle and enabled troops to carry more ammunition, making them more autonomous a greater amount of the lighter ammunition could be transported in the same amount of space. In addition, the smaller size and handiness of an assault rifle would benefit tank crews, support troops, and units with missions other than front line combat. The 5.56 45 mm NATO cartridge was developed in the 1960s, and was adopted for use in the M16 assault rifle. The M16A1 version soon followed, and was then replaced in 1982 by the M16A2.
The Soviet Union also developed its own similar round, the 5.45 39 mm, which was used in the AK 74, the successor of the AK 47.
These rounds are usually considered less lethal than the previous generation of assault rifle rounds that fired larger rifle caliber ammunition with reduced propellant, but the smaller caliber and lighter bullets achieve higher velocities than even a hunting rifle bullet. These high speeds induce additional lethality through bullet shattering, although these high speed rounds generally do not exceed the momentum of the heavier (but slower) bullets of the less sophisticated AK 47. Any pointed (spitzer) round will tumble in soft tissue. If the jacket has a cannelure like the U.S. 5.56 45 mm M193 round, the bullet will fragment, leading to significant blood loss and internal damage.
Blood loss leads to indirect incapacitation, but often takes longer than direct destruction of tissue. Since combat use of rifles expends around 50,000 rounds in suppressive fire for each combatant killed, trading lighter cartridge weight and lower recoil for slower but more sure incapacitation often makes good sense.
The key to the assault rifle concept is firing at both known ''and suspected'' enemy positions. This allows an attacking infantry unit to shoot at a hidden enemy first, rather than waiting for the enemy to fire first. Good volume and distribution of aimed suppressive fire delivered by infantry squad members as they maneuver, prevents enemy return fire, and in turn allows the assaulting unit to maneuver through enemy fields of fire faster. Faster maneuver limits the assaulting unit's vulnerability to small arms fire, artillery, mortars, or counter attack. Of course this requires a larger basic ammunition load and steady supply of rifle ammunition.
1970s, 1980s, 1990s: New form factors and features
''Many of these automatic firearms usually used the same rounds as in older eras, but focused on using new form factors, materials, and added features like standard telescopic and reflex sights.''
(France). It was adopted in 1978
The biggest change since adoption of high velocity rounds of 5 mm caliber and higher, has been designs that have new form factors, sights, electronics, and materials. A number of bullpup rifles entered service in the late 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. Although bullpup rifles had existed since the 1930s, the United Kingdom's EM2 was one of the few bullpup assault rifles prior to this time. Examples of the new trend include the FAMAS, Steyr AUG, and SA80. They were all bullpup rifles that made heavy use of composites and plastics with ambidextrous controls, and the latter both added a low power telescopic sight to the standard service version. The SAR 21, the Tavor TAR 21, and QBZ 95 follow a similar trend as well, with a bullpup configuration and heavy use of composites.
The Heckler Koch G36, adopted in the late 1990s by Spain and Germany, is of the traditional configuration, but also has integral telescopic and red dot sights and composite exterior. The XM8 rifle, developed from the G36, had similar features, but also added more electronics such as laser sight, round counter, and integral infrared laser and pointers.
The trend in the new designs, and very likely future ones, is towards more integrated features and lighter weight with new materials and configurations. Introduction of a new ammunition would require retooling factories, phasing out conventional ammunition and in general infrastructure change that is considered by many military planners too expensive to undertake.
Some have called for a reintroduction of larger caliber rounds to improve conventional lethality, or an increase in caliber in the 67 mm range, with rifle round velocities and lower mass bullets: a kind of intermediate philosophy between the smaller caliberfaster modern rounds and the standard caliber slower rounds of the previous generation. China in the late 1980's introduced a 5.8 42 mm round, with an initial velocity of 930 m s, 4.26 g bullet and 1,842 J of energy, China claims the new round provides superior performace and lethality to the NATO and modern Soviet intermediate rounds. In the United States, Remington has developed the 6.8 mm Remington SPC cartridge, which is the same overall length at the 5.56 x 45 mm NATO round but fires a bullet the same caliber at the .270 Winchester hunting cartridge. Its similar size to the 5.56 45 mm means that existing rifles can be converted without an excessive amount of trouble. Development of a 4.73 mm caseless ammunition and advanced assault rifle in the 19701980s by Germany was effectively halted by the German reunification in 1990, and that rifle never entered full production.
"Assault weapons" vs. Fully automatic weapons
Primarily in the United States, the term ''assault weapon'' is an arbitrary (and politicized) phrase generally used to describe a collection of '''''semi automatic''''' firearms that have certain features associated with military police use, such as a folding stock, flash suppressor, bayonet, protruding pistol grip, or the ability to accept a detachable magazine of a capacity larger than ten rounds. The phrase ''assault weapon'' has been used primarily in relation to a specific expired gun law that was commonly known as the 'Assault Weapons Ban', 'Clinton gun ban', or '1994 crime bill'. It is a common misconception that the assault weapons ban restricted weapons capable of fully automatic fire, such as assault rifles and machine guns. Fully automatic weapons were unaffected by the ban because they have been heavily restricted since the National Firearms Act of 1934, and other, more recent laws.
The term 'assault weapon' has often been erroneously used to describe machine guns. Many states and localities still use the term assault weapon with a variety of variations following the California model loosely. See separate article on assault weapons for further information.
See also
Automatic firearm for clarification on similar categories
Battle rifle
Federal assault weapons ban (USA)
Firearm action
Gas operated
List of firearms
External links
Category:Rifles
de:Sturmgewehr
fr:Fusil d'assaut
he:
ja:
ko:
lt:Automatas
no:Automatgev r
pl:Karabin automatyczny
ru: ( )
sl:Juri na pu ka
fi:Rynn kk kiv ri
sv:Automatkarbin
zh:
Taxobox
color pink
name Animals
image Sea nettles.jpg
image width 250px
image caption Sea nettles, ''Chrysaora quinquecirrha''
domain Eukaryota
regnum '''Animalia'''
regnum authority Linnaeus, 1758
subdivision ranks Phyla
subdivision
Porifera (sponges)
Ctenophora (comb jellies)
Cnidaria (coral, jellyfish, anemones)
Placozoa (trichoplax)
'''''Subregnum Bilateria''''' (bilateral symmetry)
Acoelomorpha (basal)
Orthonectida (parasitic to flatworms, echinoderms, etc.)
Rhombozoa (dicyemids)
Myxozoa (slime animals)
'''Superphylum Deuterostomia''' (blastopore becomes anus)
Chordata (vertebrates, etc.)
Hemichordata (acorn worms)
Echinodermata (starfish, urchins)
Chaetognatha (arrow worms and Pterobranchia)
'''Superphylum Ecdysozoa''' (shed exoskeleton)
Kinorhyncha (mud dragons)
Loricifera
Priapulida (priapulid worms)
Nematoda (roundworms)
Nematomorpha (horsehair worms)
Onychophora (velvet worms)
Tardigrada (water bears)
Arthropoda (insects, etc.)
'''Superphylum Platyzoa'''
Platyhelminthes (flatworms)
Gastrotricha (gastrotrichs)
Rotifera (rotifers)
Acanthocephala (acanthocephalans)
Gnathostomulida (jaw worms)
Micrognathozoa (limnognathia)
Cycliophora (pandora)
'''Superphylum Lophotrochozoa''' (trochophore larvae lophophores)
Sipuncula (peanut worms)
Nemertea (ribbon worms)
Phoronida (horseshoe worms)
Bryozoa (moss animals)
Entoprocta (goblet worms)
Brachiopoda (brachipods)
Mollusca (mollusks)
Annelida (segmented worms)
'''Animals''' are a major group of organisms, classified as the kingdom '''Animalia''' or '''Metazoa'''. In general they are multicellular, capable of locomotion and responsive to their environment, and feed by consuming other organisms. Their body plan becomes fixed as they develop, usually early on in their development as embryos, although some undergo a process of metamorphosis later on.
The name animal comes from the Latin word ''animal'', of which ''animalia'' is the plural, and ultimately from ''anima'', meaning vital breath or soul.
Characteristics
Kingdom Animalia has several characteristics that set it apart from other living things. Animals are eukaryotic and multicellular, which separates them from bacteria and most protists. They are heterotrophic, generally digesting food in an internal chamber, which separates them from plants and algae. They are also distinguished from plants, algae, and fungi by lacking cell walls.
Structure
With a few exceptions, most notably the sponges (Phylum Porifera), animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues. These include muscles, which are able to contract and control locomotion, and a nervous system, which sends and processes signals. There is also typically an internal digestive chamber, with one or two openings. Animals with this sort of organization are called metazoans, or eumetazoans when the former is used for animals in general.
All animals have eukaryotic cells, surrounded by a characteristic extracellular matrix composed of collagen and elastic glycoproteins. This may be calcified to form structures like shells, bones, and spicules. During development it forms a relatively flexible framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized, making complex structures possible. In contrast, other multicellular organisms like plants and fungi have cells held in place by cell walls, and so develop by progressive growth. Also, unique to animal cells are the following intercellular junctions: tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.
Reproduction and development
Nearly all animals undergo some form of sexual reproduction. Adults are diploid or occasionally polyploid. They have a few specialized reproductive cells, which undergo meiosis to produce smaller motile spermatozoa or larger non motile ova. These fuse to form zygotes, which develop into new individuals.
Many animals are also capable of asexual reproduction. This may take place through parthenogenesis, where fertile eggs are produced without mating, or in some cases through fragmentation.
A zygote initially develops into a hollow sphere, called a blastula, which undergoes rearrangement and differentiation. In sponges, blastula larvae swim to a new location and develop into a new sponge. In most other groups, the blastula undergoes more complicated rearrangement. It first invaginates to form a gastrula with a digestive chamber, and two separate germ layers an external ectoderm and an internal endoderm. In most cases, a mesoderm also develops between them. These germ layers then differentiate to form tissues and organs.
Animals grow by indirectly using the energy of sunlight. Plants use this energy to turn air into simple sugars using a process known as photosynthesis. These sugars are then used as the building blocks which allow the plant to grow. When animals eat these plants (or eat other animals which have eaten plants), the sugars produced by the plant are used by the animal. They are either used directly to help the animal grow, or broken down, releasing stored solar energy, and giving the animal the energy required for motion. This process is known as glycolysis.
Origin and fossil record
Animals are generally considered to have evolved from flagellate protozoa. Their closest living relatives are the choanoflagellates, collared flagellates that have the same structure as certain sponge cells do. Molecular studies place them in a supergroup called the opisthokonts, which also include the fungi and a few small parasitic protists. The name comes from the posterior location of the flagellum in motile cells, such as most animal sperm, whereas other eukaryotes tend to have anterior flagella.
The first fossils that might represent animals appear towards the end of the Precambrian, around 600 million years ago, and are known as the Vendian biota. These are difficult to relate to later fossils, however. Some may represent precursors of modern phyla, but they may be separate groups, and it is possible they are not really animals at all. Aside from them, most known animal phyla make a more or less simultaneous appearance during the Cambrian period, about 570 million years ago. It is still disputed whether this event, called the Cambrian explosion, represents a rapid divergence between different groups or a change in conditions that made fossilization possible.
Groups of animals
The sponges (Porifera) diverged from other animals early. As mentioned, they lack the complex organization found in most other phyla. Their cells are differentiated, but not organized into distinct tissues. Sponges are sessile and typically feed by drawing in water through pores. Archaeocyatha, which have fused skeletons, may represent sponges or a separate phylum.
Among the eumetazoan phyla, two are radially symmetric and have digestive chambers with a single opening, which serves as both the mouth and the anus. These are the Cnidaria, which include sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish, and the Ctenophora or comb jellies. Both have distinct tissues, but they are not organized into organs. There are only two main germ layers, the ectoderm and endoderm, with only scattered cells between them. As such, these animals are sometimes called diploblastic. The tiny phylum Placozoa is similar, but individuals do not have a permanent digestive chamber.
The remaining animals form a monophyletic group called the Bilateria. For the most part, they are bilaterally symmetric, and often have a specialized head with feeding and sensory organs. The body is triploblastic, i.e. all three germ layers are well developed, and tissues form distinct organs. The digestive chamber has two openings, a mouth and an anus, and there is also an internal body cavity called a coelom or pseudocoelom. There are exceptions to each of these characteristics, however for instance adult echinoderms are radially symmetric, and certain parasitic worms have extremely simplified body structures.
in their Sea Anemone home
Genetic studies have considerably changed our understanding of the relationships within the Bilateria. Most appear to belong to four major lineages:
Deuterostomes
Ecdysozoa
Platyzoa
Lophotrochozoa
In addition to these, there are a few small groups of bilaterians with relatively similar structure that appear to have diverged before these major groups. These include the Acoelomorpha, Rhombozoa, and Orthonectida. The Myxozoa, single celled parasites that were originally considered Protozoa, are now believed to have developed from the Bilateria as well.
Deuterostomes
Deuterostomes differ from the other Bilateria, called protostomes, in several ways. In both cases there is a complete digestive tract. However, in protostomes the initial opening (the archenteron) develops into the mouth, and an anus forms separately. In deuterostomes this is reversed. In most protostomes cells simply fill in the interior of the gastrula to form the mesoderm, called schizocoelous development, but in deuterostomes it forms through invagination of the endoderm, called enterocoelic pouching. Deuterostomes also have a dorsal, rather than a ventral, nerve chord and their embryos undergo different cleavage.
All this suggests the deuterostomes and protostomes are separate, monophyletic lineages. The main phyla of deuterostomes are the Echinodermata and Chordata. The former are radially symmetric and exclusively marine, such as sea stars, sea urchins, and sea cucumbers. The latter are dominated by the vertebrates, animals with backbones. These include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
In addition to these, the deuterostomes also include the Hemichordata or acorn worms. Although they are not especially prominent today, the important fossil graptolites may belong to this group. The Chaetognatha or arrow worms may also be deuterostomes, but this is less certain.
Ecdysozoa
The Ecdysozoa are protostomes, named after the common trait of growth by moulting or ecdysis. The largest animal phylum belongs here, the Arthropoda, including insects, spiders, crabs, and their kin. All these organisms have a body divided into repeating segments, typically with paired appendages. Two smaller phyla, the Onychophora and Tardigrada, are close relatives of the arthropods and share these traits.
The ecdysozoans also include the Nematoda or roundworms, the second largest animal phylum. Roundworms are typically microscopic, and occur in nearly every environment where there is water. A number are important parasites. Smaller phyla related to them are the Nematomorpha or horsehair worms, which are visible to the unaided eye, and the Kinorhyncha, Priapulida, and Loricifera, which are all microscopic. These groups have a reduced coelom, called a pseudocoelom.
The remaining two groups of protostomes are sometimes grouped together as the Spiralia, since in both embryos develop with spiral cleavage.
Platyzoa
The Platyzoa include the phylum Platyhelminthes, the flatworms. These were originally considered some of the most primitive Bilateria, but it now appears they developed from more complex ancestors.
A number of parasites are included in this group, such as the flukes and tapeworms. Flatworms lack a coelom, as do their closest relatives, the microscopic Gastrotricha.
The other platyzoan phyla are microscopic and pseudocoelomate. The most prominent are the Rotifera or rotifers, which are common in aqueous environments. They also include the Acanthocephala or spiny headed worms, the Gnathostomulida, Micrognathozoa, and possibly the Cycliophora. These groups share the presence of complex jaws, from which they are called the Gnathifera.
Lophotrochozoa
The Lophotrochozoa include two of the most successful animal phyla, the Mollusca and Annelida. The former includes animals such as snails, clams, and squids, and the latter comprises the segmented worms, such as earthworms and leeches. These two groups have long been considered close relatives because of the common presence of trochophore larvae, but the annelids were considered closer to the arthropods, because they are both segmented. Now this is generally considered convergent evolution, owing to many morphological and genetic differences between the two phyla.
The Lophotrochozoa also include the Nemertea or ribbon worms, the Sipuncula, and several phyla that have a fan of cilia around the mouth, called a lophophore. These were traditionally grouped together as the lophophorates, but it now appears they are paraphyletic, some closer to the Nemertea and some to the Mollusca and Annelida. They include the Brachiopoda or lamp shells, which are prominent in the fossil record, the Entoprocta, the Phoronida, and possibly the Bryozoa or moss animals.
History of classification
Aristotle divided the living world between animals and plants, and this was followed by Carolus Linnaeus in the first hierarchical classification. Since then biologists have begun emphasizing evolutionary relationships, and so these groups have been restricted somewhat. For instance, microscopic protozoa were originally considered animals because they move, but are now treated separately.
In Linnaeus' original scheme, the animals were one of three kingdoms, divided into the classes of Vermes, Insecta, Pisces, Amphibia, Aves, and Mammalia. Since then the last four have all been subsumed into a single phylum, the Chordata, whereas the various other forms have been separated out. The above lists represent our current understanding of the group, though there is some variation from source to source.
Usage of the word ''animal''
In everyday usage ''animal'' refers to any member of the animal kingdom that is not a human being, and sometimes excludes insects (although including such arthropods as crabs). This confusion stems primarily from the familiarity with zoo animals, farm animals and pets, not from an analytical distinction between insects, humans and the rest of the animal kingdom.
Examples
Some well known types of animals, listed by their common names:
aardvark
afghan hound
albatross
alligator
alpaca
anaconda
angelfish
anglerfish
ant
antlion
anteater
antelope
ape
aphid
armadillo
arrow crab
asp
ass
baboon
badger
bald eagle
bandicoot
barnacle
basilisk
barracuda
bass
basset hound
bat
bear
beaver
bed bug
bee
beetle
bird
bison
blackbird
black panther
black widow
blue jay
blue whale
boa
bobcat
bobolink
booby
Box jellyfish
boston terrier
bovid
buffalo
bug
bulldog
bull terrier
butterfly
buzzard
camel
canid
cape buffalo
cardinal (bird)
caribou
carp
cat
caterpillar
catfish
centipede
cephalopod
chameleon
cheetah
chickadee
chicken
chihuahua
chimpanzee
chinchilla
chipmunk
clam
clownfish
cobra
cockroach
cod
collie
condor
constrictor
coral
cougar
coyote
cow
crab
crane
crane fly
crawdad
crayfish
cricket
crocodile
crow
cuckoo
daddy longlegs
damselfly
deer
dingo
dinosaur
dog
dolphin
donkey
dormouse
dove
dragonfly
duck
dung beetle
eagle
earthworm
earwig
eel
egret
elephant
Elephant Seal
elk
emu
english pointer
english setter
ermine
falcon
ferret
finch
firefly
fish
flamingo
flea
fly
flyingfish
fowl
fox
frog
fruit bat
gazelle
gecko
gerbil
german shepherd
giant panda
giant squid
gibbon
gila monster
guanaco
guineafowl
giraffe
goat
golden retriever
goldfinch
goldfish
goose
gopher
gorilla
grasshopper
great blue heron
great dane
great white shark
greyhound
grizzly bear
grouse
guinea pig
gull
guppy
haddock
halibut
hammerhead shark
hamster
hare
harrier
hawk
hedgehog
hermit crab
heron
herring
hippopotamus
hookworm
hornet
horse
hound
human
hummingbird
humpback whale
husky
hyena
iguana
impala
insect
irish setter
irish wolfhound
Irukandji jellyfish
jackal
jaguar
jay
jellyfish
kangaroo
kangaroo mouse
kangaroo rat
kingfisher
kite
kiwi
koala
koi
komodo dragon
krill
labrador retriever
ladybug
lamprey
lark
leech
lemming
lemur
leopard
leopon
liger
lion
lizard
llama
lobster
locust
loon
louse
lungfish
lynx
macaw
mackerel
magpie
mammal
manta ray
marlin
marmoset
marmot
marsupial
marten
mastiff
meadowlark
meerkat
mink
minnow
mite
mockingbird
mole
mollusk
mongoose
monitor lizard
monkey
moose
mosquito
moth
mountain goat
mouse
mule
muskox
mussel
narwhal
newt
nightingale
ocelot
octopus
old english sheepdog
opossum
orangutan
orca
ostrich
otter
owl
ox
oyster
panda
panther
panthera hybrid
parakeet
parrot
parrotfish
partridge
peacock
peafowl
pekingese
pelican
penguin
perch
peregrine falcon
persian cat
pheasant
pig
pigeon
pike
pilot whale
piranha
platypus
polar bear
poodle
porcupine
porpoise
portuguese man o' war
possum
prairie dog
prawn
praying mantis
primate
puffin
puma
python
quail
rabbit
raccoon
rainbow trout
rat
rattlesnake
raven
reindeer
rhinoceros
right whale
roadrunner
robin
rodent
rook
roundworm
sailfish
saint bernard
salamander
salmon
sawfish
scallop
scorpion
seahorse
sea lion
sea slug
sea urchin
setter
shark
sheep
sheepdog
shrew
shrimp
siamese cat
silkworm
silverfish
skink
skunk
sloth
slug
smelt
snail
snake
snipe
snow leopard
sockeye salmon
sole
spaniel
sperm whale
spider
spider monkey
spoonbill
squid
squirrel
starfish
star nosed mole
steelhead trout
stoat
stork
sturgeon
swallow
swan
swift
swordfish
swordtail
tabby cat
tahr
takin
tapeworm
tapir
tarantula
tasmanian devil
termite
tern
terrier
thrush
tiger
tiger shark
tigon
toad
tortoise
toucan
toy poodle
trapdoor spider
tree frog
trout
tuna
turkey
turtle
tyrannosaurus
urial
vampire bat
viper
vole
vulture
wallaby
walrus
wasp
warbler
water buffalo
weasel
whale
whitefish
whooping crane
wild cat
wildebeest
wildfowl
wolf
wolverine
wombat
woodpecker
worm
wren
yak
zebra
References
Klaus Nielsen. ''Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living Phyla'' (2nd edition). Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.
Knut Schmidt Nielsen. ''Animal Physiology: Adaptation and Environment''. (5th edition). Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997.
External links
multimedia database of worldwide endangered protected species and of UK common species
animal sounds in many languages
Category:Animals
! interwiki
af:Animalia
als:Tiere
an:Animal
ast:Animal
bg:
bm:Bagan
zh min nan:T ng bu t
ca:Animal
cs: ivo ichov
cy:Anifail
da:Dyr
de:Tiere
et:Loomad
el:
es:Animal
eo:Animalo
fr:Animal
fy:Dier
ga:Ainmh
he:
hr: C5 BDivotinje
ko:
io:Animalo
id:Hewan
ia:Animal
it:Animali
kw:Enyval
ku:Ajal
la:Animalia
lv:Dz vnieki
lt:Gyv n karalyst
lb:D ierer ich
li:Diere
mk:
ms:Haiwan
nah:Yolkatl
nl:Dieren (rijk)
nds:Beest
ja:
no:Dyr
pl:Zwierz ta
pt:Animalia
ru:
scn:Armali
simple:Animal
sl: ivali
sr:
fi:El inkunta
sv:Djur
th:
uk:
zh:
vi: ng v t
chy:Hova
See Anthropology.
A '''list of notable anthropologists'''.
NOTOC
A
John Adair
Timothy Asch
B
Nigel Barley
Fredrik Barth
Vasily Bartold
Keith H. Basso
Ruth Behar
Ruth Benedict
Theodore C. Bestor
Wilhelm Bleek
Franz Boas
Pere Bosch Gimpera
Paul Pierre Broca
C
Mauro Campagnoli
Joseph Campbell
Napol on Chagnon
Pierre Clastres
Carleton Coon
Frank Hamilton Cushing
D
Raymond Dart
Ella Cara Deloria
Mary Douglas
Eugene Dubois
E
Mircea Eliade
E. E. Evans Pritchard
F
Raymond Firth
Dian Fossey
James Frazer
G
Clifford Geertz
Alfred Gell
Ernest Gellner
Max Gluckman
Jane Goodall
Robert J Gorden
Hilma Granqvist
Marcel Griaule
Jacob Grimm
Wilhelm Grimm
H
Marvin Harris
Cassidy Hendrickson
Arthur Maurice Hocart
Earnest Hooton
Ale Hrdlika
I
J
William Jones
K
Richard G. Klein
Dorinne K. Kondo
Conrad Kottak
Grover Krantz
Charles H. Kraft
Alfred L. Kroeber
Hilda Kuper
L
William Labov
George Lakoff
Bruno Latour
Edmund Leach
Louis Leakey
Mary Leakey
Richard Leakey
Claude L vi Strauss
Robert Lowie
M
Bronislaw Malinowski
Marcel Mauss
Grant McCracken
Margaret Mead
Mervyn Meggitt
Nikolay Miklukho Maklay
Sidney Mintz
Ashley Montagu
James Mooney
John H. Moore
Lewis H. Morgan
George Murdock
N
Laura Nader
Raoul Naroll
O
Gananath Obeyesekere
Marvin Opler
Morris Opler
P
Glenn Petersen
Bronislav Pilsudski
Hortense Powdermaker
Q
R
Wilhelm Radloff
Hans Ras
Alfred Reginald Radcliffe Brown
Gerardo Reichel Dolmatoff
W. H. R. Rivers
Eric Ross
S
Marshall Sahlins
Roger Sandall
Edward Sapir
Wilhelm Schmidt
Tobias Schneebaum
Afanasy Shchapov
Marilyn Strathern
T
Edward Burnett Tylor
Colin Turnbull
Victor Turner
U
V
Christine VanPool
Karl Verner
W
Camilla Wedgwood
Hank Wesselman
Leslie White
Ben White
Tim White
Benjamin Whorf
Clark Wissler
Eric Wolf
Sol Worth
X
Y
Z
Anthropologists
es:Lista de antrop logos
pl:Znani antropolodzy
pt:Lista de antrop logos
simple:Anthropologist
sl:seznam antropologov
zh:
'''''Astronomy and Astrophysics''''' (abbreviated as ''A A'' in the astronomical literature, or else ''Astron. Astrophys.'') is a European Journal, publishing papers on theoretical, observational and instrumental astronomy and astrophysics. It was published by Springer Verlag from 1969 2000, while EDP Sciences published the companion ''A A Supplement Series''. In 2000, the two journals merged, with the combined journal known simply as ''Astronomy and Astrophysics'', and published by EDP Sciences.
''A A'' is one of the major journals of astronomy, alongside the ''Astrophysical Journal'', ''Astronomical Journal'' and the ''Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society''. While the first two are often the preferred journal of US based researchers and the MNRAS is often the favoured journal for UK and Commonwealth based astronomers, A A tends to be the preferred journal of astronomers based in Europe (excluding the UK), particularly since page charges are waived for astronomers working in member countries.
''A A'' was created from the merger in 1969 of six major European astronomical journals
''Annales d'Astrophysique'' (France), founded in 1938
''Arkiv for Astronomi'' (Sweden), founded in 1948
''Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of the Netherlands'', founded in 1921
''Bulletin Astronomique'' (France), founded in 1884
''Journal des Observateurs'' (France), founded in 1915
''Zeitschrift fur Astrophysik'' (Germany), founded in 1930
and extended in 1992 by the incorporation of:
''Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of Czechoslovakia'', founded in 1947
External links
Category:Astronomy journals
taxobox
color pink
name Ray finned fish
image Herring2.jpg
image caption Atlantic herring
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis '''Actinopterygii'''
classis authority Klein 1885
subdivision ranks Subclasses
subdivision
Chondrosteibr
Neopterygiibr
See text for orders.
The '''Actinopterygii''' are the '''ray finned fish'''. They are the dominant group of vertebrates, with over 27,000 species ubiquitous throughout fresh water and marine environments.
Classification
Traditionally three grades of Actinopterygii have been recognized: the '''Chondrostei''', '''Holostei''', and '''Teleostei'''. The second is paraphyletic and tends to be abandoned, however, while the first is now restricted to those forms closer to extant Chondrostei than to the other groups. Nearly all fish alive today are teleosts. A listing of the different groups is given below, down to the level of orders, arranged in what is believed to represent the evolutionary sequence down to the level of superorder.
'''Subclass Chondrostei'''
Order Polypteriformes (bichirs)
Order Acipenseriformes (sturgeons, paddlefish)
'''Subclass Neopterygii'''
Order Semionotiformes (gars)
Order Amiiformes (bowfins)
'''Infraclass Teleostei'''
'''Superorder Osteoglossomorpha'''
Order Osteoglossiformes (bony tongues, etc)
Order Hiodontiformes (mooneye, etc)
'''Superorder Elopomorpha'''
Order Elopiformes (tarpons, etc)
Order Albuliformes (bonefishes)
Order Notacanthiformes (spiny eels)
Order Anguilliformes (true eels, gulpers)
Order Saccopharyngiformes
'''Superorder Clupeomorpha'''
Order Clupeiformes (herrings allies)
'''Superorder Ostariophysi'''
Order Gonorynchiformes
Order Cypriniformes (minnows allies)
Order Characiformes (characins allies)
Order Gymnotiformes (electric eels, knifefishes)
Order Siluriformes (catfishes)
'''Superorder Protacanthopterygii'''
Order Salmoniformes (salmon allies)
Order Esociformes (pikes allies)
Order Osmeriformes (smelts allies)
'''Superorder Sternopterygii'''
Order Ateleopodiformes (jellynose fishes)
Order Stomiiformes (dragonfishes allies)
'''Superorder Cyclosquamata'''
Order Aulopiformes (lizardfishes)
'''Superorder Scopelomorpha'''
Order Myctophiformes (lanternfishes)
'''Superorder Lampridiomorpha'''
Order Lampridiformes (opahs, etc)
'''Superorder Polymyxiomorpha'''
Order Polymixiiformes (beardfishes)
'''Superorder Paracanthopterygii'''
Order Percopsiformes (trout perches allies)
Order Batrachoidiformes (toadfishes)
Order Lophiiformes (goosefishes, etc)
Order Gadiformes (cods allies)
Order Ophidiiformes (cusk eels, etc)
'''Superorder Acanthopterygii'''
Order Mugiliformes (mullets allies)
Order Atheriniformes (silversides allies)
Order Beloniformes (needlefishes, etc)
Order Cetomimiformes (whalefishes)
Order Cyprinodontiformes (killifishes, etc)
Order Stephanoberyciformes (pricklefishes, whalefishes, etc)
Order Beryciformes (alfonsinos, etc)
Order Zeiformes (dories, etc)
Order Gasterosteiformes (sticklebacks, pipefishes, seahorses, etc)
Order Synbranchiformes (swamp eels, etc)
Order Tetraodontiformes (triggerfishes allies)
Order Pleuronectiformes (flatfishes allies)
Order Scorpaeniformes (scorpionfishes allies)
Order Perciformes (perches many allies)
Subphulum Vertebrata
External links
References
Category:Bony fish
bg:
cs:Paprskoploutv
da:Str lefinnede fisk
de:Strahlenflosser
fa:
fr:Actinopterygii
ko:
is:Geisluggar
he:
la:Actinopterygii
lt:Stipinpelek s uvys
nl:Straalvinnigen
ja:
no:Str lefinnede fisker
pl:Promieniop etwe
pt:Actinopterygii
fi:Viuhkaev iset
sv:Taggfeniga fiskar
zh:
'''Albert Einstein''' (March 14, 1879 April 18, 1955) was a German born theoretical physicist widely regarded as the greatest scientist of the 20th century. He was the author of the general theory of relativity and made important contributions to the special theory of relativity, quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and cosmology. He was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize for Physics for his explanation of the photoelectric effect in 1905 (his "miracle year") and "for his services to Theoretical Physics."
After British solar eclipse expeditions in 1919 confirmed that light rays from distant stars were deflected by the gravity of the sun in the exact amount he predicted in his general theory of relativity, Einstein became world famous, an unusual achievement for a scientist. In his later years, his fame exceeded that of any other scientist in history. In popular culture, his name has become synonymous with great intelligence and genius.
Biography
to Italy.
Youth and college
Einstein was born on March 14, 1879 at Ulm in Baden W rttemberg, German Empire, about 100 km east of Stuttgart. His parents were Hermann Einstein, a featherbed salesman who later ran an electrochemical works, and Pauline, whose maiden name was Koch. They were married in Stuttgart Bad Cannstatt. The family was Jewish (non observant) Albert attended a Catholic elementary school and, at the insistence of his mother, was given violin lessons. Though he initially disliked (and eventually discontinued) the lessons, he would later take great solace in Mozart's violin sonatas.
When Albert was five, his father showed him a pocket compass, and Einstein realized that something in "empty" space acted upon the needle he would later describe the experience as one of the most revelatory of his life. Though he built models and mechanical devices for fun and showed great mathematical faculty early on, he was considered a slow learner, possibly due to dyslexia, simple shyness, or the significantly rare and unusual structure of his brain (examined after his death). He later credited his development of the theory of relativity to this slowness, saying that by pondering space and time later than most children, he was able to apply a more developed intellect. Some researchers have speculated that Einstein may have exhibited some traits of mild forms of autism, although they concede that a reliable posthumous diagnosis is impossible.
In 1889, a student named Max Talmud introduced Einstein to key science and philosophy texts including Kant's ''Critique of Pure Reason''. Two of his uncles would further foster his intellectual interests during his late childhood and early adolescence by suggesting and providing books on science, mathematics and philosophy.
Einstein attended the Luitpold Gymnasium where he received a relatively progressive education. He began to learn mathematics around age twelve: in 1891, he taught himself Euclidean plane geometry from a school booklet and began to study calculus. There is a recurring rumor that he failed mathematics later in his education, but this is untrue a change in the way grades were assigned caused confusion years later. While there, he clashed with authority and resented the school regimen, believing the spirit of learning and creative thought were lost in such an endeavor as strict memorization.
In 1894, following the failure of Hermann's electrochemical business, the Einsteins moved from Munich to Pavia, Italy (near Milan). Einstein's first scientific work was written therein (called "''The Investigation of the State of Aether in Magnetic Fields''"). Albert remained behind in Munich lodgings to finish school, completing only one term before leaving the gymnasium in spring 1895 to rejoin his family in Pavia. He quit without telling his parents and a year and a half prior to final examinations, Einstein convinced the school to let him go with a medical note from a friendly doctor, but this meant he had no secondary school certificate. That year, at the age of 16, he performed the thought experiment known as Albert Einstein's mirror. After gazing into a mirror, he examined what would happen to his image if he were moving at the speed of light his conclusion that the speed of light is independent of the observer would later become one of the two postulates of special relativity.
Despite excelling in the mathematics and science portion, his failure of the liberal arts portion of the ''Eidgen ssische Technische Hochschule'' (ETH, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, in Zurich) entrance exam the following year was a setback his family sent him to Aarau, Switzerland, to finish secondary school, where he studied the seldom taught Maxwell's electromagnetic theory and received his diploma in September 1896. During this time he lodged with Professor Jost Winteler's family and became enamoured with Marie, their daughter, his first sweetheart. Albert's sister Maja was to later marry their son Paul, and his friend Michele Besso married their other daughter Anna. Einstein subsequently enrolled at the ''Eidgen ssische Technische Hochschule'' in October and moved to Zurich, while Marie moved to Olsberg for a teaching post. The same year, he renounced his W rttemberg citizenship and became stateless.
In the spring of 1896, the Serbian Mileva Mari started initially as a medical student at the University of Zurich, but after a term switched to the same section as Einstein as the only woman that year to study for the same diploma. Einstein's relationship with Mileva developed into romance over the next few years.
In 1900, he was granted a teaching diploma by the ''Eidgen ssische Technische Hochschule'' (ETH Zurich). Einstein then wrote his first published paper on the capillary forces of a drinking straw, wherein he tried to unify the laws of physics, an attempt he would continually make throughout his life. (It was titled "''Folgerungen aus den Capillarit tserscheinungen''," which translated is "''Consequences of the observations of capillarity phenomena''," found in "''Annalen der Physik''" volume 4, page 513.) Shortly following, Einstein was accepted as a Swiss citizen in 1901 he kept his Swiss passport for his whole life. Through his friend Michelle Besso, an engineer, he was presented with the works of Ernst Mach and later would consider him "the best sounding board in Europe" for physical ideas. During this time Einstein discussed his scientific interests with a group of close friends, including Besso and Mileva. The men referred to themselves as the "Olympia Academy." He and Mileva had an illegitimate daughter Lieserl, born in January 1902.
Work and doctorate
''"
Upon graduation, Einstein could not find a teaching post, mostly because his brashness as a young man had apparently irritated most of his professors. The father of a classmate helped him obtain employment as a technical assistant examiner at the Swiss Patent Office in 1902. There, Einstein judged the worth of inventors' patent applications for devices that required a knowledge of physics to understand in particular he was chiefly charged to evaluate patents relating to electromagnetic devices. He also learned how to discern the essence of applications despite sometimes poor descriptions, and was taught by the director how "to express him self correctly". He occasionally rectified their design errors while evaluating the practicality of their work.
Einstein married Mileva Mari on January 6, 1903. Einstein's marriage to Mari , who was a mathematician, was both a personal and intellectual partnership: Einstein referred to Mileva as "a creature who is my equal and who is as strong and independent as I am". Ronald W. Clark, a biographer of Einstein, claimed that Einstein depended on the distance that existed in his and Mileva's marriage in order to have the solitude necessary to accomplish his work he required intellectual isolation. Abram Joffe, a Soviet physicist who knew Einstein, in an obituary of Einstein, wrote, "The author of the papers of 1905 was ... a bureaucrat at the Patent Office in Bern, Einstein Mari " and this has recently been taken as evidence of a collaborative relationship. However, according to Alberto A. Mart nez of the Center for Einstein Studies at Boston University, Joffe only ascribed authorship to Einstein, as he believed that it was a Swiss custom at the time to append the spouse's last name to the husband's name. Whatever the truth, the extent of her influence on Einstein's work is a highly controversial and debated question.
On May 14, 1904, the couple's first son, Hans Albert Einstein, was born. In 1903, Einstein's position at the Swiss Patent Office had been made permanent, though he was passed over for promotion until he had "fully mastered machine technology". He obtained his doctorate after submitting his thesis "''A new determination of molecular dimensions''" ("''Eine neue Bestimmung der Molek ldimensionen''") in 1905.
That same year, he wrote four articles that provided the foundation of modern physics, without much scientific literature to which he could refer or many scientific colleagues with whom he could discuss the theories. Most physicists agree that three of those papers (on Brownian motion, the photoelectric effect, and special relativity) deserved Nobel Prizes. Only the paper on the photoelectric effect would be mentioned by the Nobel committee in the award. This is ironic, not only because Einstein is far better known for relativity, but also because the photoelectric effect is a quantum phenomenon, and Einstein became somewhat disenchanted with the path quantum theory would take. In each of these papers, Einstein boldly took an idea from theoretical physics to its logical consequences and managed to explain experimental results that had baffled scientists for decades.
and Einstein
Annus Mirabilis Papers
Einstein submitted the series of papers to the "''Annalen der Physik''". They are commonly referred to as the "''Annus Mirabilis Papers''" (from ''Annus mirabilis'', Latin for 'year of wonders'). The International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) commemorated the 100th year of the publication of Einstein's extensive work in 1905 as the 'World Year of Physics 2005'.
The first paper, named "''On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light''", ("'' ber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen Gesichtspunkt''") proposed that "energy quanta" (which are essentially what we now call photons) were real, and showed how they could be used to explain such phenomena as the photoelectric effect. This paper was specifically cited for his Nobel Prize. Max Planck had made the formal assumption that energy was quantized in deriving his black body radiation law, published in 1901, but had considered this to be no more than a mathematical trick. The photoelectric effect thus provided a simple confirmation of Max Planck's hypothesis of quanta.
His second article in 1905, named "''On the Motion Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid''", ("'' ber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W rme geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Fl ssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen''") covered his study of Brownian motion, and provided empirical evidence for the existence of atoms. Before this paper, atoms were recognized as a useful concept, but physicists and chemists hotly debated whether atoms were real entities. Einstein's statistical discussion of atomic behavior gave experimentalists a way to count atoms by looking through an ordinary microscope. Wilhelm Ostwald, one of the leaders of the anti atom school, later told Arnold Sommerfeld that he had been converted to a belief in atoms by Einstein's complete explanation of Brownian motion. At the same time as Einstein, Brownian Motion was also described by Smoluchowski.
Einstein's third paper that year, "''On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies''" ("''Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter K rper''"), was published in September 1905. This paper introduced the special theory of relativity, a theory of time, distance, mass and energy which was consistent with electromagnetism, but omitted the force of gravity. While developing this paper, Einstein wrote to Mileva about "our work on relative motion", and this has led some to ask whether Mileva played a part in its development. A few historians of science believe that Einstein and his wife were both aware that the famous Frenchman Henri Poincar had already published the equations of Relativity, a few weeks before Einstein submitted his paper most believe their work independent, especially given Einstein's isolation at this time.
A fourth paper, "''Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?''", ("''Ist die Tr gheit eines K rpers von seinem Energieinhalt abh ngig?''") published late in 1905, showed one further deduction from relativity's axioms, the famous equation that the energy of a body at rest (''E'') equals its mass (''m'') times the speed of light (''c'') squared: ''E mc''. ! whether this is correct or should be included seems dubious: , this equation having been first correctly published by Henri Poincar (1900), for the case of mass equivalence of electromagnetic radiation. Max Planck(1907) questioned the reasoning in Einstein's derivation, and H.E.Ives(1953) called Einstein's derivation a tautology.
Middle years
.
In 1906, Einstein was promoted to technical examiner second class. In 1908, Einstein was licensed in Bern, Switzerland, as a Privatdozent (unsalaried teacher at a university). Einstein's second son, Eduard, was born on July 28, 1910. At this time, he described why the sky is blue in his paper on the phenomenon of critical opalescence, which shows the cumulative effect of scattering of light by individual molecules in the atmosphere. In 1911, Einstein became first associate professor at the University of Zurich, and shortly afterwards full professor at the (German) University of Prague, only to return the following year to Zurich in order to become full professor at the ETH Zurich. At that time, he worked closely with the mathematician Marcel Grossmann. In 1912, Einstein started to refer to time as the fourth dimension (although H.G. Wells had done this earlier, in 1895 in ''The Time Machine'').
In 1914, just before the start of World War I, Einstein settled in Berlin as professor at the local university and became a member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. He took German citizenship. His pacifism and Jewish origins irritated German nationalists. After he became world famous, nationalistic hatred of him grew and for the first time he was the subject of an organized campaign to discredit his theories. From 1914 to 1933, he served as director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in Berlin, and it was during this time that he was awarded his Nobel Prize and made his most groundbreaking discoveries. He was also an extraordinary professor at the Leiden University from 1920 until officially 1946, where he regularly gave guest lectures.
In 1917, Einstein published "''On the Quantum Mechanics of Radiation''" ("''Zur Quantenmechanik der Strahlung''", Physkalische Zeitschrift 18, 121 128). This article introduced the concept of stimulated emission, the physical principle that allows light amplification in the laser. He also published a paper that year that used the general theory of relativity to model the behavior of the entire universe, setting the stage for modern cosmology. In this work he created his self described "worst blunder", the cosmological constant.
Einstein divorced Mileva on February 14, 1919, and married his cousin Elsa L wenthal (born Einstein: L wenthal was the surname of her first husband, Max) on June 2, 1919. Elsa was Albert's first cousin (maternally) and his second cousin (paternally). She was three years older than Albert, and had nursed him to health after he had suffered a partial nervous breakdown combined with a severe stomach ailment there were no children from this marriage. The fate of Albert and Mileva's first child, Lieserl, is unknown. Some believe she died in infancy, while others believe she was given out for adoption. They later had two sons: Eduard and Hans Albert. Eduard intended to practice as a Freudian analyst but was institutionalized for schizophrenia and died in an asylum. Hans Albert, his older brother, became a professor of hydraulic engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, having little interaction with his father.
'' on November 10 1919.
General relativity
In November 1915, Einstein presented a series of lectures before the Prussian Academy of Sciences in which he described his theory of gravity, known as general relativity. The final lecture climaxed with his introduction of an equation that replaced Newton's law of gravity, the Field Equation, which was first derived from a variational principle by David Hilbert. This theory considered all observers to be equivalent, not only those moving at a uniform speed. In general relativity, gravity is no longer a force (as it is in Newton's law of gravity) but is a consequence of the curvature of space time.
The theory provided the foundation for the study of cosmology and gave scientists the tools for understanding many features of the universe that were discovered well after Einstein's death. A truly revolutionary theory, general relativity has so far passed every test posed to it and has become a powerful tool used in the analysis of many subjects in physics.
Initially, scientists were skeptical because the theory was derived by mathematical reasoning and rational analysis, not by experiment or observation. But in 1919, predictions made using the theory were confirmed by Arthur Eddington's measurements (during a solar eclipse), of how much the light emanating from a star was bent by the Sun's gravity when it passed close to the Sun, an effect called gravitational lensing. The observations were carried out on May 29, 1919, at two locations, one in Sobral, Cear , Brazil, and another in the island of Principe, in the west coast of Africa. On November 7, ''The Times'' reported the confirmation, cementing Einstein's fame.
Many scientists were still unconvinced for various reasons ranging from disagreement with Einstein's interpretation of the experiments, to not being able to tolerate the absence of an absolute frame of reference. In Einstein's view, many of them simply could not understand the mathematics involved. Einstein's public fame which followed the 1919 article created resentment among these scientists some of which lasted well into the 1930s.
In the early 1920s Einstein was the lead figure in a famous weekly physics colloquium at the University of Berlin. On March 30, 1921, Einstein went to New York to give a lecture on his new Theory of Relativity, the same year he was awarded the Nobel Prize. Though he is now most famous for his work on relativity, it was for his earlier work on the photoelectric effect that he was given the Prize, as his work on general relativity was still disputed. The Nobel committee decided that citing his less contested theory in the Prize would gain more acceptance from the scientific community.
Sir Edmund Whittaker(1953) stated that David Hilbert published the theory of general relativity ''nearly simultaneously'' with Einstein.
The "Copenhagen" interpretation
sparred over quantum theory during the 1920s.
Einstein's postulation that light can be described not only as a wave with no kinetic energy, but also as massless discrete packets of energy called quanta with measurable kinetic energy (now known as photons) was a landmark break with the classical physics. In 1909 Einstein presented his first paper on the quantification of light to a gathering of physicists and told them that they must find some way to understand waves and particles together.
In the mid 1920s, as the original quantum theory was replaced with a new theory of quantum mechanics, Einstein balked at the Copenhagen interpretation of the new equations because it settled for a probabilistic, non visualizable account of physical behaviour. Einstein agreed that the theory was the best available, but he looked for a more "complete" explanation, i.e., more deterministic. He could not abandon the belief that physics described the laws that govern "real things", the belief which had led to his successes with atoms, photons, and gravity.
In a 1926 letter to Max Born, Einstein made a remark that is now famous:
: ''Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing. But an inner voice tells me it is not yet the real thing. The theory says a lot, but does not really bring us any closer to the secret of the Old One. I, at any rate, am convinced that He does not throw dice.''
To this, Bohr, who sparred with Einstein on quantum theory, retorted, "Stop telling God what He must do!" The Bohr Einstein debates on foundational aspects of quantum mechanics happened during the Solvay conferences.
Einstein was not rejecting probabilistic theories ''per se''. Einstein himself was a great statistician, using statistical analysis in his works on Brownian motion and photoelectricity and in papers published before the miraculous year 1905 Einstein had even discovered Gibbs ensembles. He believed, however, that at the core reality behaved deterministically. Many physicists argue that experimental evidence contradicting this belief was found much later with the discovery of Bell's Theorem and Bell's inequality. Nonetheless, there is still space for lively discussions about the interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Bose Einstein statistics
In 1924, Einstein received a short paper from a young Indian physicist named Satyendra Nath Bose describing light as a gas of photons and asking for Einstein's assistance in publication. Einstein realized that the same statistics could be applied to atoms, and published an article in German (then the lingua franca of physics) which described Bose's model and explained its implications. Bose Einstein statistics now describe any assembly of these indistinguishable particles known as bosons. The Bose Einstein condensate phenomenon was predicted in the 1920s by Bose and Einstein, based on Bose's work on the statistical mechanics of photons, which was then formalized and generalized by Einstein. The first such condensate was produced by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman in 1995 at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Einstein's original sketches on this theory were recovered in August 2005 in the library of Leiden University.
Einstein also assisted Erwin Schr dinger in the development of the quantum Boltzmann distribution, a mixed classical and quantum mechanical gas model although he realized that this was less significant than the Bose Einstein model and declined to have his name included on the paper.
The Einstein refrigerator
's refrigerator patent diagram.
Einstein and former student Le Szil rd co invented a unique type of refrigerator (usually called the Einstein refrigerator) in 1926. On November 11, 1930, was awarded to Albert Einstein and Le Szil rd. The patent covered a thermodynamic refrigeration cycle providing cooling with no moving parts, at a constant pressure, with only heat as an input. The refrigeration cycle used ammonia, butane, and water.
World War II
When Adolf Hitler came to power in January 1933, Einstein was a guest professor at Princeton University, a position which he took in December 1932, after a invitation from the American educator, Abraham Flexner. In 1933, the Nazis passed "The Law of the Restoration of the Civil Service" which forced all Jewish university professors out of their jobs, and throughout the 1930s a campaign to label Einstein's work as "Jewish physics"in contrast with "German" or "Aryan physics"was led by Nobel laureates Philipp Lenard and Johannes Stark. With the assistance of the SS, the ''Deutsche Physik'' supporters worked to publish pamplets and textbooks denigrating Einstein's theories and attempted to politically blacklist German physicists who taught them, notably Werner Heisenberg. Einstein renounced his German citizenship and stayed in the United States, where he was given permanent residency. He accepted a position at the newly founded Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton Township, New Jersey. He became an American citizen in 1940, though he still retained Swiss citizenship.
In 1939, under the encouragement of Szil rd, Einstein sent a letter to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt urging the study of nuclear fission for military purposes, under fears that the Nazi government would be first to develop atomic weapons.
Roosevelt started a small investigation into the matter which eventually became the massive Manhattan Project. Einstein himself did not work on the bomb project, however.
The International Rescue Committee was founded 1933 at the request of Albert Einstein to assist opponents of Adolf Hitler.
For more information, see the section below on Einstein's political views.
Institute for Advanced Study
His work at the Institute for Advanced Study focused on the unification of the laws of physics, which he referred to as the ''Unified Field Theory''. He attempted to construct a model which would describe all of the fundamental forces as different manifestations of a single force. This took the form of an attempt to unify the gravitational and electrodynamic forces. His attempt was hindered because the strong and weak nuclear forces were not understood independently until around 1970, fifteen years after Einstein's death. Einstein's goal of unifying the laws of physics under a single model survives in the current drive for unification of the forces, embodied most notably by string theory.
Generalized theory
Einstein began to form a generalized theory of gravitation with the Universal Law of Gravitation and the electromagnetic force in his first attempt to demonstrate the unification and simplification of the fundamental forces. In 1950 he described his work in a ''Scientific American'' article. Einstein was guided by a belief in a single statistical measure of variance for the entire set of physical laws.
Einstein's Generalized Theory of Gravitation is a universal mathematical approach to field theory. He investigated reducing the different phenomena by the process of logic to something already known or evident. Einstein tried to unify gravity and electromagnetism in a way that also led to a new subtle understanding of quantum mechanics.
Einstein postulated a four dimensional space time continuum expressed in axioms represented by five component vectors. Particles appear in his research as a limited region in space in which the field strength or the energy density are particularly high. Einstein treated subatomic particles as objects embedded in the unified field, influencing it and existing as an essential constituent of the unified field but not of it. Einstein also investigated a natural generalization of symmetrical tensor fields, treating the combination of two parts of the field as being a natural procedure of the total field and not the symmetrical and antisymmetrical parts separately. He researched a way to delineate the equations and systems to be derived from a variational principle.
Einstein became increasingly isolated in his research on a generalised theory of gravitation and was ultimately unsuccessful in his attempts. In particular, his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces ignored work in the physics community at large, most notably the discovery of the strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force.
style, in Princeton (112 Mercer Street).
Final years
In 1948, Einstein served on the original committee which resulted in the founding of Brandeis University. A portrait of Einstein was taken by Yousuf Karsh on February 11 of that same year. In 1952, the Israeli government proposed to Einstein that he take the post of second president. He declined the offer, and remains the only United States citizen ever to be offered a position as a foreign head of state. On March 30, 1953, Einstein released a revised unified field theory.
He died at 1:15 AM in Princeton, New Jersey, on April 18, 1955 at the age of 76 from internal bleeding, which was caused by the rupture of an aortic aneurism, leaving the Generalized Theory of Gravitation unsolved. The only person present at his deathbed, a hospital nurse, said that just before his death he mumbled several words in German that she did not understand. He was cremated without ceremony on the same day he died at Trenton, New Jersey, in accordance with his wishes. His ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location.
An autopsy was performed on Einstein by Dr. Thomas Stoltz Harvey, who removed and preserved his brain. Harvey found nothing unusual with his brain, but in 1999 further analysis by a team at McMaster University revealed that his parietal operculum region was missing and, to compensate, his inferior parietal lobe was 15 wider than normal. The inferior parietal region is responsible for mathematical thought, visuospatial cognition, and imagery of movement. Einstein's brain also contained 73 more glial cells than the average brain.
Personality
Albert Einstein was much respected for his kind and friendly demeanor rooted in his pacifism. He was modest about his abilities, and had distinctive attitudes and fashions for example, he minimized his wardrobe so that he would not need to waste time in deciding on what to wear. He was captivatingly simple, wearing mothy sweaters and sweatshirts and sans socks in his old age. He occasionally had a playful sense of humor, and enjoyed sailing and playing the violin. He was also the stereotypical bumbling "absent minded professor" he was often forgetful of everyday items, such as keys, and would focus so intently on solving physics problems that he would often become oblivious to his surroundings. In his later years, his appearance inadvertently created (or reflected) another stereotype of scientist in the process: the researcher with unruly white hair.
Religious views
Although he was raised Jewish, he was not a believer in the religious aspect of Judaism, though he still considered himself a Jew. He simply admired the beauty of nature and the universe. From a letter written in English, dated March 24, 1954, Einstein wrote, ''"It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a lie which is being systematically repeated. I do not believe in a personal God and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in me which can be called religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the world so far as our science can reveal it."''
He also said (in an essay reprinted in ''Living Philosophies'', vol. 13, 1931): ''"A knowledge of the existence of something we cannot penetrate, our perceptions of the profoundest reason and the most radiant beauty, which only in their most primitive forms are accessible to our minds it is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute true religiosity in this sense, and this sense alone, I am a deeply religious man."''
The following is a response made to Rabbi Herbert Goldstein of the International Synagogue in New York which read, ''"I believe in Spinoza's God who reveals himself in the orderly harmony of what exists, not in a God who concerns himself with the fates and actions of human beings."'' After being pressed on his religious views by Martin Buber, Einstein exclaimed, ''"What we physicists strive for is just to draw His lines after Him."'' He also quoted once ''"When I read the Bhagavad Gita, I ask myself how God created the universe. Everything else seems superfluous."'' Summarizing his religious beliefs, he once said: ''"My religion consists of a humble admiration of the illimitable superior spirit who reveals himself in the slight details we are able to perceive with our frail and feeble mind."''
Einstein was an Honorary Associate of the Rationalist Press Association beginning in 1934, and was an admirer of Ethical Culture.
Political views
, the chairman of the Soviet Jewish Anti Fascist Committee, in 1943.
Einstein considered himself a pacifist and humanitarian, and in later years, a committed democratic socialist. He once said, ''"I believe Gandhi's views were the most enlightened of all the political men of our time. We should strive to do things in his spirit: not to use violence for fighting for our cause, but by non participation of anything you believe is evil."'' Einstein's views on other issues, including socialism, McCarthyism and racism, were controversial. In a 1949 article entitled "Why Socialism?", Albert Einstein described the "predatory phase of human development", exemplified by a chaotic capitalist society, as a source of evil to be overcome. He disapproved of the totalitarian regimes in the Soviet Union and elsewhere, and argued in favor of a democratic socialist system which would combine a planned economy with a deep respect for human rights. Einstein was a co founder of the liberal German Democratic Party and a member of the AFL CIO affiliated union the American Federation of Teachers.
Einstein was very much involved in the Civil Rights movement. He was a close friend of Paul Robeson for over 20 years. Einstein was a member of several civil rights groups (including the Princeton chapter of the NAACP) many of which were headed by Paul Robeson. He served as co chair with Paul Robeson of the ''American Crusade to End Lynching''. When W.E.B. DuBois was frivolously charged with being a communist spy during the McCarthy era while he was in his 80s, Einstein volunteered as a character witness in the case. The case was dismissed shortly after it was announced that he was to appear in that capacity. Einstein was quoted as saying that "racism is America's greatest disease".
The U.S. FBI kept a 1,427 page file on his activities and recommended that he be barred from immigrating to the United States under the Alien Exclusion Act, alleging that Einstein ''"believes in, advises, advocates, or teaches a doctrine which, in a legal sense, as held by the courts in other cases, 'would allow anarchy to stalk in unmolested' and result in 'government in name only'"'', among other charges. They also alleged that Einstein ''"was a member, sponsor, or affiliated with thirty four communist fronts between 1937 1954"'' and ''"also served as honorary chairman for three communist organizations"''. It should be noted that many of the documents in the file were submitted to the FBI, mainly by civilian political groups, and not actually written by FBI officials.
, to President Roosevelt arguing that the United States should start funding research into the development of nuclear weapons.
Einstein opposed tyrannical forms of government, and for this reason (and his Jewish background), opposed the Nazi regime and fled Germany shortly after it came to power. At the same time, Einstein's anarchist nephew Carl Einstein, who shared many of his views, was fighting the fascists in the Spanish Civil War. Einstein initially favored construction of the atomic bomb, in order to ensure that Hitler did not do so first, and even sent a letter to President Roosevelt (dated August 2, 1939, before World War II broke out, and probably written by Le Szil rd) encouraging him to initiate a program to create a nuclear weapon. Roosevelt responded to this by setting up a committee for the investigation of using uranium as a weapon, which in a few years was superseded by the Manhattan Project.
After the war, though, Einstein lobbied for nuclear disarmament and a world government: "I do not know how the Third World War will be fought, but I can tell you what they will use in the Fourth rocks!"
Einstein was a supporter of Zionism. He supported Jewish settlement of the ancient seat of Judaism and was active in the establishment of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, which published (1930) a volume titled ''About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein'', and to which Einstein bequeathed his papers. However, he opposed nationalism and expressed skepticism about whether a Jewish nation state was the best solution. He may have imagined Jews and Arabs living peacefully in the same land. In later life, in 1952, he was offered the post of second president of the newly created state of Israel, but declined the offer, claiming that he lacked the necessary people skills. Einstein was disturbed by the violence taking place in the Palestine after the Second World War and expressed that he was disappointed with the Jewish Ultra Nationalist Organization (Irgun and Stern Gang). Nonetheless, Einstein remained deeply committed to the welfare of Israel and the Jewish people for the rest of his life.
Einstein, along with Albert Schweitzer and Bertrand Russell, fought against nuclear tests and bombs. As his last public act, and just days before his death, he signed the Russell Einstein Manifesto, which led to the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs. His letter to Russell read:
:Dear Bertrand Russell,
::Thank you for your letter of April5. I am gladly willing to sign your excellent statement. I also agree with your choice of the prospective signers.
:With kind regards, A. Einstein
Nationality: German, Swiss or American?
Einstein was born a German citizen. At the age of seventeen, on January 28, 1896, he was released from the German citizenship by his own request and with the approval of his father. He remained stateless for five years. On February 21, 1901 he gained Swiss citizenship, which he never revoked. Einstein regained German citizenship in April 1914 when he entered German civil service, but due to the political situation and the persecution of Jewish people in Nazi Germany, he left civil service in March 1933 and thus also lost the German citizenship. On October 1, 1940, Einstein became an American citizen. He remained both an American and a Swiss citizen until his death on April 18, 1955.
Popularity and cultural impact
Einstein's popularity has led to widespread use of Einstein in advertising and merchandising, including the registration of "Albert Einstein" as a trademark.
on March 14, 1951, UPI.
Entertainment
Albert Einstein has become the subject of a number of novels, films and plays, including Jean Claude Carrier's 2005 French novel, Einstein S'il Vous Plait (Please Mr Einstein), Nicolas Roeg's film ''Insignificance'', Fred Schepisi's film ''I.Q.'', Alan Lightman's novel ''Einstein's Dreams'', and Steve Martin's comedic play "Picasso at the Lapin Agile". He was the subject of Philip Glass's groundbreaking 1976 opera ''Einstein on the Beach''. His humorous side is also the subject of Ed Metzger's one man play ''Albert Einstein: The Practical Bohemian''.
He is often used as a model for depictions of eccentric scientists in works of fiction his own character and distinctive hairstyle suggest eccentricity, or even lunacy and are widely copied or exaggerated. TIME magazine writer Frederic Golden referred to Einstein as "a cartoonist's dream come true."
On Einstein's 72nd birthday in 1951, the UPI photographer Arthur Sasse was trying to coax him into smiling for the camera. Having done this for the photographer many times that day, Einstein stuck out his tongue instead. The image has become an icon in pop culture for its contrast of the genius scientist displaying a moment of levity. Yahoo Serious, an Australian film maker, used the photo as an inspiration for the intentionally anachronistic movie ''Young Einstein''.
Licensing
Einstein bequeathed his estate, as well as the use of his image (see personality rights), to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Einstein actively supported the university during his life and this support continues with the royalties received from licensing activities. The Roger Richman Agency licences the commercial use of the name "Albert Einstein" and associated imagery and likenesses of Einstein, as agent for the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. As head licensee the agency can control commercial usage of Einstein's name which does not comply with certain standards (e.g., when Einstein's name is used as a trademark, the symbol must be used). As of May, 2005, the Roger Richman Agency was acquired by Corbis.
Honors
Einstein has received a number of posthumous honors. For example:
In 1992, he was ranked 10 on Michael H. Hart's list of the most influential figures in history.
In 1999, he was named ''Person of the Century'' by TIME magazine.
Also in 1999, Gallup recorded him as the fourth most admired person of the 20th century.
The year 2005 was designated as the "World Year of Physics" by UNESCO for its coinciding with the centennial of the "Annus Mirabilis" papers, celebrated at the Einstein Symposium.
Among Einstein's many namesakes are:
a unit used in photochemistry, the ''einstein''.
the chemical element 99, einsteinium.
the asteroid 2001 Einstein.
the Albert Einstein Peace Prize.
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University was named after Einstein upon his death in 1955.
the Albert Einstein Medical Center in Philadelphia, PA.
See also
Special relativity
General relativity
History of special relativity
History of general relativity
Henri Poincar
David Hilbert
Priority disputes about Einstein and the relativity theories
Works by Albert Einstein
.
''''. (PDF)
''Ideas Opinions'' ISBN 0517003937
''The World As I See It'' ISBN 080650711X (translation of "Mein Weltbild")
''Relativity: The Special and General Theory.'' ISBN 0517884410 ()
"" ''Annalen der Physik.'' June 30, 1905
"" ''Annalen der Physik.'' September 27, 1905.
"." 1914. PDF
"." ''Annalen der Physik,'' 49. 1916.
"Fundamental ideas and problems of the theory of relativity." ''1921 Nobel Lecture in Physics.'' Nordic Assembly of Naturalists at Gothenburg, 11 July 1923.
Einstein A., Lorenz H. A., Weyl H. and Minkowski H. ''The Principle of Relativity.'' Trans. W. Perrett and G. B. Jeffery. New York: Dover Publications, 1923.
"" ''Monthly Review.'' May 1949 ().
''''. April, 1950.
References
thumb right 215px The Albert Einstein Memorial, Washington DC at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, DC.
.
This is the definitive scientific biography.
This book discusses non science aspects of Einstein marriages, affairs, illegitimate daughter, public image.
Discusses the final disposition of Einstein's brain, hair, and eyes as well as the importance of Einstein and his work in the shaping of science and culture.
Notes
.
See also People speculated to have been autistic.
Highfield.
Ibid.
Galison p. 368.
Galison p. 370.
David Hilbert actually published the field equation in an article dated five days before Einstein's lecture. But according to Thorne (pp. 117118), Hilbert had discovered the correct derivation after "mulling over things he had learned" on a recent visit by Einstein to Gottingen. However Thorne goes on to say "Quite naturally, and in accord with Hilbert's view of things, the resulting law of warpage was quickly given the name the ''Einstein field equation'' rather than being named after Hilbert. Hilbert had carried out the last few mathematical steps to its discovery independently and almost simultaneously with Einstein, but Einstein was responsible for essentially everything that preceded those steps: the recognition that tidal gravity must be the same thing as a warpage of spacetime, the vision that the law of warpage must obey the reativity principle, and the first 90 percent of that law, the Einstein field equation. In fact without Einstein the general relativistic laws of gravity might not have been discovered until several decades later." See Priority disputes about Einstein and the relativity theories for more details.
Ibid.
Calaprice p. 173.
External links
Nobel Prize in Physics:
Annalen der Physik: digitalized at The University of Applied Sciences in Jena (Fachhochschule Jena)
S. Morgan Friedman, "" Comprehensive listing of online resources about Einstein.
TIME magazine 100:
Hundreds of famous Albert Einstein quotes
''Audio excerpts of famous speeches: '' , , (From Time magazine archives)
Leiden University:
PBS:
PBS
PBS : Mileva Maric
FBI: investigation regarding affiliation with the Communist Party
University of Frankfurt:
Salon.com:
Max Planck Institute:
American Institute of Physics: includes his life and work, audio files and full site available as a downloadable PDF for classroom use
American Museum of Natural History:
The Economist:
Einstein Home:
World Year of Physics 2005
The Guardian:
Rabindranath Tagore's
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
Einstein, Albert
af:Albert Einstein
als:Albert Einstein
ar:
an:Albert Einstein
ast:Albert Einstein
bg:
be:
bn:
bs:Albert Einstein
br:Albert Einstein
ca:Albert Einstein
cs:Albert Einstein
da:Albert Einstein
de:Albert Einstein
et:Albert Einstein
el:
es:Albert Einstein
eo:Albert EINSTEIN
eu:Albert Einstein
fa:
fr:Albert Einstein
ga:Albert Einstein
gd:Albert Einstein
gl:Albert Einstein
ko:
hr:Albert Einstein
io:Albert Einstein
ilo:Albert Einstein
id:Albert Einstein
ia:Albert Einstein
is:Albert Einstein
it:Albert Einstein
he:
jv:Albert Einstein
kn:
ka: ,
ku:Albert Einstein
lad:Albert Einstein
la:Albertus Einstein
lv:Alberts Ein teins
lt:Albertas Ein teinas
lb:Albert Einstein
hu:Albert Einstein
mk:
mr:
ms:Albert Einstein
nl:Albert Einstein
nds:Albert Einstein
ja:
no:Albert Einstein
nn:Albert Einstein
os: ,
pl:Albert Einstein
pt:Albert Einstein
ro:Albert Einstein
ru: ,
sco:Albert Einstein
sq:Albert Einstein
scn:Albert Einstein
simple:Albert Einstein
sk:Albert Einstein
sl:Albert Einstein
sr:
fi:Albert Einstein
sv:Albert Einstein
tl:Albert Einstein
ta:
tt:Albert Einstein
th:
vi:Albert Einstein
tpi:Albert Einstein
tr:Albert Einstein
uk:
zh:
Infobox Country
native name br br Da Afghanistan Islami Dawlatbr Dawlate Islamiye Afghanistan br Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
common name Afghanistan
image flag 2001.gif
image coat Afghanistan COA.png
image map LocationAfghanistan.png
national motto None
national anthem Soroud e Melli
official languages Pashto, Persian (Dari)
capital Kabul
latd 34 latm 30 latNS N longd 69 longm 10 longEW E
largest city Kabul
government type Islamic Republic
leader titles President
leader names Hamid Karzai
area rank 40th
area magnitude 1 E11
area 647,500
areami 250,001 ! Do not remove per WP:MOSNUM
percent water 0
population estimate 29,928,987
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 38th
population census
population census year
population density 43
population densitymi 111 ! Do not remove per WP:MOSNUM
population density rank n a
GDP PPP year 2004
GDP PPP 21.5 billion
GDP PPP rank 105th
GDP PPP per capita 800
GDP PPP per capita rank 185th
HDI year 2003
HDI NA
HDI rank unranked
HDI category font color grayNA font
sovereignty type Independence
established events
established dates (from UK control over Afghan affairs)br 1919
currency Afghani small(Af) small
currency code AFN
country code AFG
time zone
utc offset 4:30
time zone DST
utc offset DST 4:30
cctld .af
calling code 93
footnotes
'''Afghanistan''' (Pashto Dari Persian: , Af nist n) is a landlocked country at the crossroads of Asia. Generally considered a part of Central Asia, it is sometimes ascribed to a regional bloc in either South Asia or the Middle East, as it has cultural, ethno linguistic, and geographic links with most of its neighbors. It is bordered by Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and east, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the north, and China to the east. It has a population of 30 million people, although this remains an estimate, as no official census has been taken for decades.
Afghanistan literally translates to 'land of the Afghans', but a plethora of other names have been applied to its general location in the past. Between the fall of the Taliban after the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan and the 2003 Loya jirga, Afghanistan was referred to by the Government of the United States as the ''Transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan''. Under its new constitution, the country is now officially named the '''Islamic Republic of Afghanistan'''.
! Orphaned information:
Population of Kabul: 1,424,400 (1988)
Land borders: 5,529 km
Coastline: Landlocked
National Day: 18 August
Religions: Sunni 84 , Shi'a 15
1 Afghani 100 puls
Origin and history of the name
The name of '''Afghanistan''' derives from word ''Afghan''. The Pushtuns appear to have begun using the term Afghan as a name for themselves from the Islamic period onwards. According to W.K. Frazier Tyler, M.C. Gillet and several other scholars, ''"The word Afghan first appears in history in the Hudud al Alam in 982 AD."''
There are numerous views, regarding the origin of name Afghan, most of them being purely speculative as can be seen below:
Makhzan i Afghni by Nematullah written in 1612 CE, traces the Afghan or Pakhtun origin from the super Patriarch Abraham down to one named King Talut or Saul. It states that Saul had a son Irmia (Jeremia), who had a son called Afghana. Upon the death of King Saul, Afghana was raised by David, and was later promoted to the chief command of the army during the reign of King Solomon. The progeny of this Afghana multiplied numerously, and came to be called ''Bani Israel''. In the sixth century BCE, Bakhtunnasar, or Nebuchadnezzar king of Babul, attacked Judah and exiled the progeny of Afghana to Ghor located in the center of what is now Afghanistan. In course of time, the exiled community came to be addressed as ''Afghan'' after the name of their ancestor, and the country got its name as Afghanistan. This traditional view has many historical discrepancies, and is therefore not accepted by modern scholarship the last pleader for the ''Bani Israel'' hypothesis being Mayor Raverty (The Pathans, 1958, Olaf Caroe).
Another version of Pushtun legend places Afghana, the professed eponymous ancestor of the Afghans or Pushtuns, as a contemporary of Muslim Prophet Mohammad. On hearing about the new faith of Islam, Qais from Aryana travelled to Medina to see the Muslim Prophet Muhammad, and returned to Aryana as a Muslim. Qais Abdur Rashid purportedly had many sons, one of whom was Afghana. Afghana, in turn, had four sons who set out to the east to establish their separate lineages. The first son went to Swat, the second to Lahore and India, the third to Multan, and the last one to Quetta. This legend is one of many traditional tales amongst the Pashtuns regarding their disparate origins. Again, it was this legendary Afghana who is stated to have given the Pushtuns their current name. It is notable that the Afghan of this legend is separated from the Afghana of Solomon's times by at least 11 centuries.
Dr H.W. Bellew, in his book ''An Enquiry into the Ethnography of Afghanistan'', believes that the name ''Afghan'' derives from the Latin term ''Alban'', used by Armenians as ''Alvan'' or ''Alwan'', which refers to mountaineers, and in the case of transliterated Armenian characters, would be pronounced as ''Aghvan'' or ''Aghwan''. To the Persians, this would further be altered to ''Aoghan'', ''Avghan'', and ''Afghan'' as a reference to the highlanders or "mountaineers" of the eastern Iranian plateau.
Some people hold that the name derives from "Abagan" (i.e without God) which term the Persians are stated to have coined for the Pushtuns to describe them as ''Godless or non believers''. It is claimed that word ''Abagan'' is antonym of the word Bagan ( believer in God) just as word apolitical is antonym of political in the English language.
There are also a few people who link "Afghan" to an Uzbek word "''Avagan''" said to mean "original". Still others believe that the name derives from Sanskrit ''upa ganah'', said to mean "allied tribes".
Another etymological view is that the name ''Afghan'' evidently derives from Sanskrit Ashvaka or Ashvakan (q.v), the Assakenoi of Arrian. This view was propounded by J. W. McCrindle and is supported by numerous modern scholars (including C. Lassen, S. Martin, Bishop, Crooks, W. Crooke, J. C. Vidyalnar, M. R. Singh, P. Smith, N. L. Dey, Dr J. L. Kamboj, S. Kirpal Singh and several others). In Sanskrit, word ''ashva'' (Iranian ''aspa'', Prakrit ''assa'') means "horse", and ''ashvaka'' (Prakrit ''assaka'') means "horseman". Pre Christian times knew the people of eastern Afghanistan as ''Ashvakas'' (horsemen), since they raised a fine breed of horses and had a reputation for providing expert cavalrymen. The fifth century BCE Indian grammarian Panini calls them ''Ashvayana'' and ''Ashvakayana''. Classical writers use the respective equivalents ''Aspasios'' (or Aspasii, Hippasii) and ''Assakenois'' (or Assaceni Assacani, Asscenus). The Aspasios Assakenois ( Ashvakas cavalrymen) is stated to be another name for the Kambojas because of their equestrian characteristics (see List of country name etymologies).
The last part of the name ''Afghanistan'' originates from the Persian word ''stn'' (''country'' or ''land''). The English word ''Afghanland'' that appeared in various treaties between Qajar Persia and the United Kingdom dealing with the Eastern lands of the Persian kingdom (modern Afghanistan) was adopted by the Afghans and became ''Afghanistan''.
Before being called 'Afghanistan', the region had gone through several name changes in its long history of around 5000 years. One of the most ancient names, according to historians and scholars, was ''Ariana'' the Greek pronunciation of the ancient Avestan ''Aryanam Vaeja'' or the Sanskrit "Aryavarta", ''Land of the Aryans''. Today this Old Persian, and Avestan expression is preserved in the name ''Iran'' and it is noted in the name of the Afghan national airline, ''Ariana Airlines''. The term 'Ariana Afghanistan' is still popular amongst Persian speakers in the country.
Many centuries later, Afghanistan was part of Greater Khorasan, and hence was recognized with the name Khorasan (along with regions centered around Merv and Neishabur), which in Pahlavi means "The Eastern Land" ( in Persian). ''(Dehkhoda, p8457)''
History
Afghanistan exists at a unique nexus point where numerous Eurasian civilizations have interacted and often fought and was an important site of early historical activity. Through the ages, the region today known as ''Afghanistan'' has been invaded by a host of peoples, including the Aryans, Medes, Persians, Greeks, Mauryans, Kushans, Sassanians, Arabs, Turks, British, and Soviets, but rarely have these groups managed to exert complete control over the region. On other occasions, native Afghan entities have invaded surrounding regions to form empires of their own.
in 2001 calling them "Us Islamic". Photo by Hadi Zaheer
Between 2000 and 1200 BCE, waves of Indo European speaking Aryans are thought to have flooded into modern day Afghanistan, setting up a nation that became known as ''Ary n m X a ra'', or "Land of the Aryans." Zoroastrianism is speculated to have possibly originated in Afghanistan between 1800 to 800 BCE. Ancient Eastern Iranian languages such as Avestan may have been spoken in Afghanistan around a similar time line with the rise of Zoroastrianism. Around 1000 BCE (or earlier), the Indo Aryan Vedic civilization may have arisen near the vicinity of the Kabul valley of eastern Afghanistan, but this remains speculative as more viable theories based upon archaeological finds tend to support the emergence of the Vedic civilization east of the Indus and or Ganges in what is today Pakistan and India. By the middle of the 6th century BCE, the Persian Empire supplanted the Medes and incorporated Aryana within its boundaries and by 330 BCE, Alexander the Great had invaded the region. Following Alexander's brief occupation, the Hellenic successor states of the Seleucids and Bactrians controlled the area, while the Mauryans from India annexed the southeast for a time and introduced Buddhism to the region until the area returned to the Bactrian rule.
During the 1st century CE, the Kushans, a Tocharian people from Central Asia with Indo European origins, occupied the region. Thereafter, Aryana fell to a number of Eurasian tribes including Parthians, Scythians, and Huns, as well as the Sassanian Persians and local rulers such as the Hindu Shahis in Kabul until the 7th century CE, when Muslim Arab armies invaded the region.
The Arabs initially annexed parts of western Afghanistan in 652 and then conquered most of the rest of Afghanistan between 706 709 CE and administered the region as Khorasan, and over time much of the local population converted to Islam, but retained their Iranian languages. Afghanistan became the center of various important empires, including the Ghaznavid Empire (962 1151), founded by a local Turkic ruler from Ghazni named Yamin ul Dawlah Mahmud, that expanded its suzerainty over a vast area from Kurdistan to northern India. This empire was replaced by the Ghorid Empire (1151 1219), founded by another local ruler, this time of Tajik extraction, Muhammad Ghori, whose domains included huge parts of Central and South Asia, and laid the foundations for the Delhi Sultanate in India.
In 1219, the region was overrun by the Mongols under Genghis Khan, who devastated the land. Their rule continued with the Ilkhanates, and was extended further following the invasion of Tamerlane (Timur Leng), a ruler from Central Asia. By 1400, all of Afghanistan came under his dominion, and he also laid the foundation of another Islamic empire in India, the Mughal Empire. The Uzbek born Babur, a descendant of both Tamerlane and Genghis Khan, established an empire with its capital at Kabul by 1504, and then expanded into South Asia in 1525 and established the Mughal Empire's rule throughout much of what is today Pakistan and northern India by 1527. As the empire shifted eastward, the Safavids of Persia challenged Mughal rule while the two superpower empires of the day battled over the fate of Afghanistan for decades with the Persians acquiring the area by the mid 17th century.
Local Ghilzai Pashtun tribesmen, lead by Khan Nashir, successfully overthrew Safavid rule, and under the Hotaki dynasty, briefly controlled all or parts of Persia itself from 1722 to 1736. Following a brief period under the rule (1736 1747) of the Turko Iranian conqueror Nadir Shah, one of his high ranking military officers, Ahmad Shah Abdali, himself a Pashtun tribesman of the Abdali clan, called for a ''loya jirga'' following Nadir Shah's assassination (for which many implicate Abdali) in 1747. The Afghans Pashtuns came together at Kandahar in 1747 and chose Ahmad Shah, who changed his last name to Durrani (meaning 'pearl of pearls' in Persian), to be king. The Afghanistan nation state as it is known today came into existence in 1747 as the Durrani Empire, and expanded outward from traditional Pashtun territories to include all of what is today Afghanistan, a portion of Mashad in Iran, and all of Pakistan and Kashmir as well. The Durrani Empire lasted for nearly a century until internecine conflict and wars with the Persians and Sikhs diminished their empire by the early 19th century. However, the current borders of Afghanistan would not be determined until the coming of the British.
During the 19th century, following the Anglo Afghan wars (fought in 1839 1842, 1878 1880, and lastly in 1919), Afghanistan saw much of its territory and autonomy ceded to the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom exercised a great deal of influence, and it was not until King Amanullah acceded to the throne in 1919 (see "The Great Game") that Afghanistan regained complete independence. During the period of British intervention in Afghanistan, ethnic Pashtun territories were divided by the Durand Line, and this would lead to strained relations between Afghanistan and British India, and later the new state of Pakistan, over what came to be known as the Pashtunistan debate.
The historical rulers of Afghanistan were part of the Abdali tribe of the ethnic Afghans, whose name was changed to Durrani upon the accession of Ahmad Shah. They belonged to the Saddozay segment of the Popalzay clan, or to the Mohammadzay segment of the Barakzay clan, of the ethnic Afghans. The Mohammadzay frequently furnished the Sadozay kings with top counselors, who served occasionally as regents, and identified with the name Mohammadzay.
Since 1900, eleven monarchs and rulers have been unseated through undemocratic means: in 1919 (assassination), 1929 (abdication), 1929 (execution), 1933 (assassination), 1973 (deposition), 1978 (execution), 1979 (execution), 1979 (execution), 1987 (removal), 1992 (overthrow), 1996 (overthrow) and 2001 (overthrow).
The longest period of stability in Afghanistan was between 1933 and 1973, when the country was under the rule of King Zahir Shah. However, in 1973, Zahir's brother in law, Sardar Mohammed Daoud launched a bloodless coup. Daoud and his entire family were murdered in 1978 when the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan launched a coup known as the Great Saur Revolution and took over the government.
Opposition against, and conflict within, the series of communist governments that followed, was considerable. As part of a Cold War strategy, the US government began to covertly fund and train anti government Mujahideen forces through the Pakistani secret service agency known as Inter Services Intelligence or ISI, which were derived from discontented Muslims in the country who opposed the official atheism of the Marxist regime, in 1978. In order to bolster the local Communist forces the Soviet Union citing the 1978 Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Good Neighborliness that had been signed between the two countries in 1978 intervened on December 24, 1979. The Soviet occupation resulted in a mass exodus of over 5 million Afghans who moved into refugee camps in neighboring Pakistan and Iran. More than 3 million alone settled in Pakistan. Faced with mounting international pressure and the loss of approximately 15,000 Soviet soldiers as a result of Mujahideen opposition forces trained by the United States, Pakistan, and other foreign governments, the Soviets withdrew ten years later, in 1989. For more details, see Soviet war in Afghanistan.
The Soviet withdrawal was seen as an ideological victory in the US, which ostensibly had backed the Mujahideen in order to counter Soviet influence in the vicinity of the oil rich Persian Gulf. Following the removal of the Soviet forces in 1989, the US and its allies lost interest in Afghanistan and did little to help rebuild the war ravaged country. The USSR continued to support the regime of Dr. Najubullah (formerly the head of the secret service, Khad) until its downfall in 1992. However, the absence of the Soviet forces resulted in the downfall of the government as it steadily lost ground to the guerrilla forces.
As the vast majority of the elites and intellectuals had either been systematically eliminated by the Communists, or escaped to take refuge abroad, a dangerous leadership vacuum came into existence. Fighting continued among the various Mujahidin factions, eventually giving rise to a state of warlordism. The chaos and corruption that dominated post Soviet Afghanistan in turn spawned the rise of the Taliban in response to the growing chaos. The most serious fighting during this growing civil conflict occurred in 1994, when 10,000 people were killed during factional fighting in Kabul.
Exploiting the chaotic situation in Afghanistan, a few regional bedfellows including fundamentalist Afghans trained in refugee camps in western Pakistan, the Pakistani secret intelligence service (ISI), the regional Mafia (well established network that smuggled mainly Japanese electronics and tyres before the Russian invasion, now involved in drug smuggling) and Arab extremist groups (that were looking for a safe operational hub) joined forces and helped to create the Taliban movement (Rashid 2000). Backed by Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and other strategic allies, the Taliban developed as a politico religious force, and eventually seized power in 1996. The Taliban were able to capture 90 of the country, aside from the Afghan Northern Alliance strongholds primarily found in the northeast in the Panjshir Valley. The Taliban sought to impose a strict interpretation of Islamic ''Sharia'' law and gave safe haven and assistance to individuals and organizations that were implicated as terrorists, most notably Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda network.
The United States and allied military action in support of the opposition following the September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attacks forced the Taliban's downfall. In late 2001, major leaders from the Afghan opposition groups and diaspora met in Bonn, and agreed on a plan for the formulation of a new government structure that resulted in the inauguration of Hamid Karzai as Chairman of the Afghan Interim Authority (AIA) on December 2001. After a nationwide ''Loya Jirga'' in 2002, Karzai was elected President.
On March 3 and March 25 2002, a series of earthquakes struck Afghanistan, with a loss of thousands of homes and over 1800 lives. Over 4000 more people were injured. The earthquakes occurred at Samangan Province (March 3) and Baghlan Province (March 25). The latter was the worse of the two, and caused most of the casualties. International authorities assisted the Afghan government in dealing with the situation.
As the country continues to rebuild and recover, as of late 2005, it was still struggling against widespread poverty, continued warlordism, a virtually non existent infrastructure, possibly the largest concentration of land mines on earth and other unexploded ordinance, as well as a sizable illegal poppy and heroin trade. Afghanistan also remains subject to occasionally violent political jockeying, and the nation's first elections were successfully held in 2004 as women parliamentarians were selected in record numbers. Parliamentary elections in 2005 helped to further stabilize the country politically, in spite of the numerous problems it faced, including inadequate international assistance. The country continues to grapple with occasional acts of violence from a few remaining al Qaeda and Taliban and the instability caused by warlords.
See also: Afghanistan timeline, Invasions of Afghanistan
Politics
''Main article: Politics of Afghanistan''
Afghanistan is currently led by president Hamid Karzai, who was elected in October of 2004. Before the election, Karzai led the country after having been hand picked by the administration of United States' President Bush to head an interim government, after the fall of the Taliban. His current cabinet includes members of the Afghan Northern Alliance, and a mix from other regional and ethnic groups formed from the transitional government by the Loya jirga (grand council). Former monarch Mohammed Zahir Shah returned to the country, but was not reinstated as king, and only exercises limited ceremonial powers.
Under the Bonn Agreement the Afghan Constitution Commission was established to consult with the public and formulate a draft constitution. The meeting of a constitutional ''loya jirga'' was held in December 2003, when a new constitution was adopted creating a presidential form of government with a bicameral legislature.
Troops and intelligence agencies from the United States and a number of other countries are present, some to keep the peace, others assigned to hunt for remnants of the Taliban and al Qaeda. A United Nations peacekeeping force called the International Security Assistance Force has been operating in Kabul since December 2001. NATO took control of this Force on August 11, 2003. Some of the country remains under the control of warlords.
On March 27, 2003, Afghan deputy defense minister and powerful warlord General Abdul Rashid Dostum created an office for the North Zone of Afghanistan and appointed officials to it, defying then interim president Hamid Karzai's orders that there be no zones in Afghanistan.
Eurocorps took over the responsibility for the NATO led ISAF in Kabul August 9, 2004.
National elections were held on October 9, 2004. Over 10 million Afghans were registered to vote. Most of the 17 candidates opposing Karzai boycotted the election, charging fraud He was inaugurated as president on December 7. It was the country's first national election since 1969, when parliamentary elections were last held.
On September 18 2005, parliamentary elections were held the parliament opened on the following December 19.
On December 20 Karzai's close ally and president of the first mujahideen government, Sibghatullah Mojadeddi, was picked to head the 102 seat upper house.
On December 21, Yunus Qanuni, Afghan opposition leader and Karzai's main opponent was chosen to lead the 249 seat lower house of parliament with 122 votes against 117 for his closest challenger.
see also: List of leaders of Afghanistan, List of Afghanistan Governors
Subdivisions
Afghanistan is divided into 34 provinces (''velayat'') which are further divided into districts.
''Main article: Provinces of Afghanistan''
''Main article: Districts of Afghanistan''
The 34 provinces are:
small1 small Badakhshan
small2 small Badghis
small3 small Baghlan
small4 small Balkh
small5 small Bamiyan
small6 small Daikondi
small7 small Farah
small8 small Faryab
small9 small Ghazni
small10 small Ghowr
small11 small Helmand
small12 small Herat
small13 small Jowzjan
small14 small Kabul
small15 small Kandahar
small16 small Kapisa
small17 small Khost
small18 small Konar
small19 small Kunduz
small20 small Laghman
small21 small Lowgar
small22 small Nangarhar
small23 small Nimruz
small24 small Nurestan
small25 small Oruzgan
small26 small Paktia
small27 small Paktika
small28 small Panjshir
small29 small Parvan
small30 small Samangan
small31 small Sar e Pol
small32 small Takhar
small33 small Vardak
small34 small Zabol
Geography
''Main article: Geography of Afghanistan''
Afghanistan is a land locked mountainous country, with plains in the north and southwest. The highest point, at 7485 m (24,557 ft) above sea level, is Nowshak. Large parts of the country are dry, and fresh water supplies are limited. Afghanistan has a continental climate, with hot summers and cold winters. The country is frequently subject to earthquakes.
The major cities of Afghanistan are its capital Kabul, Herat, Jalalabad, Mazar e Sharif and Kandahar.
See also List of cities in Afghanistan, Places in Afghanistan.
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Afghanistan''
Afghanistan is an extremely impoverished country, being one of the world's poorest and least developed countries. Two thirds of the population lives on less than US 2 a day. The economy has suffered greatly from the recent political and military unrest since the 1979 80 Soviet invasion and subsequent conflicts, while severe drought added to the nation's difficulties in 1998 2001.
About 70 percent of the population is under 30 according to Asian Development Bank. The total fertility rate is 6.8, the highest in South Asia (with a regional average at 3.3), but so are mortality rates. Infant mortality rate is 166 per 1000 births. The economically active population in 2002 was about 11 million (out of a total of an estimated 29 million). While there are no official unemployment rate estimates available, it is evident that it is high. The number of non skilled young people is estimated at 3 million, which is likely to increase by some 300,000 per annum. (Fujimura, 2004a).
The country's natural resources include copper, zinc and iron ore in central areas precious and semi precious stones such as lapis, emerald and azure in the north east and east and (unproved) oil and gas reserves in the north. However, "its significant mineral resources remain largely untapped because of the Afghan War of the 1980s and subsequent fighting" (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2005). A good portion of Afghanistan GDP comes from illicit drugs including opium, its derivtives morphine and heroin and hashish.
On a positive note, international efforts to rebuild Afghanistan led to the formation of the Afghan Interim Authority (AIA) as a result of the December 2001 Bonn Agreement, and later addressed at the Tokyo Donors Conference for Afghan Reconstruction in January 2002, where 4.5 billion was committed in a trust fund to be administered by the World Bank Group. Priority areas for reconstruction include the rebuilding of education system, health, and sanitation facilities, enhancement of administrative capacity, the development of the agricultural sector, and the rebuilding of road, energy, and telecommunication links.
According to a 2004 report by the Asian Development Bank, the present reconstruction effort is two pronged: first it focuses on rebuilding critical physical infrastructure, and second, on building modern public sector institutions from the remnants of Soviet style planning to ones that promote market led development (Fujimura, 2004b). But macroeconomic planning and management at present is hampered by poor information, weak service delivery systems, and less than adequate law enforcement.
The country has been going through economic recovery since the Taliban were overthrown in October 2001. However, estimating Afghanistan's economy is problematic as it is impossible to gather reliable statistics while it is going through a significant change period in all fronts, with the added problem of less than ideal security situation. The best estimate that can be relied upon is that of the Central Statistical Office in 2003, from which the CIA Factbook seems to have drawn some data. Accordingly, the country's estimated gross domestic product (GDP) was 21.5 billion in 2003, a 28.6 growth over 2002 (CIA Factbook 2003)
Among the 232 listed countries in the CIA Factbook, Afghanistan ranks 108th in terms of GDP, which means per capita income of 800. A brief comparison shows that Afghanistan is the poorest country among its neighbors. Pakistan, with a GDP of 347 billion in 2003 had a per capita purchasing power of 2200 and Iran with its 517 billion had 7700. In the north, Turkmenistan had a GDP of 27.6 billion and a per capita income of 5700, Uzbekistan with its 48 billion had 1800, and Tajikistan despite a low GDP of only 8 billion had a per capita income of 1100 per head. The World Bank estimates that Afghanistan will remain in need of external financial help before it can stand on its own feet economically.
Ironically, Afghanistan's GDP ranks approximately at the same level as Jordan ( 25.5bn) and Qatar ( 19.5bn). However, considering that those oil rich Arab states have smaller populations, Jordan per capita income amounts to 4500 and Qatar's to 23,200.
One of the main drivers for the current economic recovery is the return of over two million refugees from neighbouring countries and the West, who brought with them fresh energy, entrepreneurship and wealth creating skills as well as much needed capital to start up small businesses. What is also helping is the estimated 2 3 billion in international assistance, the partial recovery of the agricultural sector, and the reestablishment of market institutions.
While the country's current account deficit is largely financed with the "donor money", only a small portion about 15 is provided directly to the government budget. The rest is provided to non budgetary expenditure and donor designated projects through the UN system and NGOs. It needs to be mentioned that there are some (as yet unconfirmed) claims that most of this money is spent on the expenses of the UN and other non governmental organizations as well as being funneled into illegitimate activities.
The government had a central budget of only 350 million in 2003 and an estimated 550 million in 2004. The country's foreign exchange reserves totals about 500 million. Revenue is mostly generated through customs, as income and corporate tax bases are negligible.
Inflation had been a major problem until 2002. However, the depreciation of the afghani in 2002 after the introduction of the new notes (which replaced 1,000 old afghani by 1 new afghani) coupled with the relative stability compared to previous periods has helped prices to stabilize and even decrease between December 2002 and February 2003, reflecting the turnaround appreciation of the new Afghani currency. Since then, the index has indicated stability, with a moderate increase toward late 2003 (Fujimura, 2004c).
The Afghan government and international donors seem to remain committed to improving access to basic necessities, infrastructure development, education, housing and economic reform. The central government is also focusing on improved revenue collection and public sector expenditure discipline. The rebuilding of the financial sector seems to have been so far successful. Money can now be transferred in and out of the country via official banking channels and according to accepted international norms. A new law on private investment provides 3 7 year tax holidays to eligible companies and a 4 year exemption from exports tariffs and duties.
While these improvements will help rebuild a strong basis for the nation in the future, for now, the majority of the population continues to suffer from insufficient food, clothing, housing, medical care, and other problems exacerbated by military operations and political uncertainties. The government is not strong enough to collect customs duties from all the provinces due to the power of the warlords. Fraud is widespread and corruption is rife within all Afghan government organs, and central authority is barely felt in the lawless south and south west (The Economist, 2005).
Expanding poppy cultivation and a growing opium trade is another huge problem for the country. The CIA estimates that one third of the country's GDP comes from opium export, although the Asian Development Bank states a lower figure, namely 2.5 billion (12 of the GDP). At any rate, this is not only one of Kabul's most serious policy and law enforcement challenges, but also one of the world's most serious problems.
The problem began with the Soviet invasion in 1979 80. As the government began to lose control of provinces, "warlordism" flourished and with it opium production as regional commanders searched for ways to generate money to purchase weapons, according to the UN. (At this time the West was pursuing an "arms length" supporting strategy of the Afghan freedom fighters or Mujahidin, the main purpose being to cripple the USSR slowly into withdrawal rather than a quick and decisive overthrow).
When the West abandoned Afghanistan after its perceived victory over the Soviet Union as the Red Army was forced to withdraw in 1989, a power vacuum was created. Various Mujahidin factions started fighting against each other for power. With the discontinuation of Western support, they resorted ever more to poppy cultivation to finance their military existence.
The regional mafia, who were looking for a safe operational hub, joined forces with the more fanatic sections of the Mujahidin supported by Arab extremists like Osama bin Laden as well as the Pakistani secret intelligence service ISI to form the Taliban movement towards the end of 1994 (Rashid, 2000) .
The Taliban, having taken control of 90 of the country, actively encouraged poppy cultivation. With this, they not only fulfilled their promises and obligations to their partners the regional mafia but also increased their own desperately needed income through taxes. According to the above UN source, Afghanistan saw a bumper opium crop of 4,600 million tonnes in 1999, which was the height of the Taliban rule in Afghanistan. When they came under extreme international diplomatic pressure in 2002, they initiated a ban on poppy cultivation.
Following the US led coalition war that led to the defeat of the Taliban in November 2001 which essentially collapsed the economy, the relatively few other sources of revenue forced many of the country's farmers to resort back to growing cash crops for export. A notable example of such a crop is the opium poppy (1,300 km in 2004 according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime), the cultivation of which has largely increased during the last decade: Afghanistan has become the first illicit opium producer in the world, before Burma (Myanmar), part of the so called "Golden Triangle".
The main obstacle to eradicating poppy cultivation in Afghanistan is the US forces' need for the warlords and their forces in hunting terrorists. The warlords are the major culprits in poppy cultivation, but are also highly useful to the US forces in scouting, providing local intelligence, keeping their own territories clean from Al Qaeda and Taliban insurgents, and even taking part in military operations all for money. This also contributes to the lack of central government's real authority in provinces and discourages farmers from growing grain and fruit as they did for centuries previously.
In short, the Afghan economy is currently (December 2005) going through a hefty change period. On the one hand, there are encouraging signs of positive development and increasing wealth creation and management. But on the other hand, the security situation, the lingering war against terrorism and the opium problem have created tall barriers for Afghanistan to rejoin the international community in prosperity and economic development.
Economy References
Fujimura, Manabu (2004) "Afghan Economy After the Election", Asian Development Bank Institute
CIA Factbook (2003), Afghanistan Section
The Economist magazine, UK, October 2005
UN Office for the Coordination of Human Affairs website
Rashid, Ahmed (2000) "Taliban Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in Central Asia", Yale University Press
The BBC
Demographics
''Main article: Demographics of Afghanistan''
The population of Afghanistan is divided into a wide variety of ethnic groups largely composed of Iranian and Turkic peoples. Because a systematic census has not been held in the country in decades, exact figures about the size and composition of the various ethnic groups are not available. Therefore most figures are approximations only. According to the CIA World FactBook (updated on 17 May 2005), an approximate ethnic group distribution is as follows:
Pashtun 30 , Tajik 29 ,, Hazara 22 , Uzbek 11 , Aimak 5 , Turkmen 3 , Baloch 2 , other 4 including sikhs.
The CIA factbook on languages in Afghanistan refers to the official languages of Afghanistan as being Persian (local name: Dari) 50 and Pashtu 35 . Other languages include Turkic languages (primarily Uzbek and Turkmen) 11 , 30 minor languages (primarily Balochi and Pashai) 4 . Bilingualism is common.
Religiously, Afghans are overwhelmingly Muslim (approximately 80 Sunni and 19 Shi'a). There are also small Hindu and Sikh minorities. Afghanistan was once home to a many centuries old Jewish minority, numbering approximately 5,000 in 1948. Most Jewish families fled the country after the 1979 Soviet invasion, and only one individual remains today, Zablon Simintov. With the fall of the Taliban a number of Sikhs have returned to the Ghazni, Nangarhar, Kandahar and Kabul Provinces of Afghanistan.
Constitution
''Main article: Constitution of Afghanistan''
According to the 2004 constitution, Afghanistan is run by a president, who is elected by direct popular vote to a five year term. The president may only serve two terms. A candidate for president must be at least forty years of age, a Muslim, and a citizen of Afghanistan. The country has two vice presidents. The president serves as head of state and government, and is commander in chief of the armed forces. The president makes appointments for his cabinet, as well as posts in the military, police force, and provincial governorships, with the approval of parliament.
The legislative body of Afghanistan is a parliament consisting of two houses: the ''Wolesi Jirga'' (House of the People) and the ''Meshrano Jirga'' (House of Elders). The ''Wolesi Jirga'' consists of up to 250 members elected to five year terms through direct elections in proportion to the population of each province. At least two women must be elected from each province. In the ''Meshrano Jirga'', one third of the members are elected by provincial councils for four years, one third are elected by district councils of each province for three years, and one third are appointed by the president for five years, of whom half must be women.
The judicial system of Afghanistan consists of the ''Stera Mahkama'' (Supreme Court), appeals courts, and lower district courts designated by law. The ''Stera Mahkama'' is made up of nine judges appointed by the president, with the approval of parliament, to a ten year term. Judges must be at least forty years of age, not belong to a political party, and have a degree in law or Islamic jurisprudence. The ''Stera Mahkama'' can judge the constitutionality of all laws in the country.
Culture
''Main article: Culture of Afghanistan''
Afghans display pride in their country, ancestry, military prowess, and above all, their independence. Like other highlanders, Afghans are regarded with mingled apprehension and condescension, for their high regard for personal honor, for their clan loyalty and for their readiness to carry and use arms to settle disputes. (Heathcote, 2003). As clan warfare internecine feuding has been one of their chief occupations since time immemorial, this individualistic trait has made it difficult for foreign invaders to hold the region.
Afghanistan has a complex history that has survived either in its current cultures or in the form of various languages and monuments. However, many of the country's historic monuments have been damaged in recent wars. The two famous statues of Buddha in the Bamiyan Province were destroyed by the Taliban, who regarded them as idolatrous. Other famous sites include the very cities of Herat, Ghazni and Balkh. The Minaret of Jam, in the Hari Rud valley, is a UNESCO World Heritage site.
The people of Afghanistan are prominent horsemen as the national sport is Buzkashi. Afghan hounds (a type of running dogs) also originated in Afghanistan.
Although literacy levels are very low, classic Persian poetry plays a very important role in Afghan culture. Poetry has always been one of the major educational pillars in both Iran and Afghanistan, to the level that it has integrated itself into culture. Private poetry competition events known as musha era are quite common even among ordinary people. Almost every home owns one or more poetry collection of some sort, even if it is not read often.
The Afghan dialect of the Persian language Dari derives from "Farsi e Darbari", meaning 'Persian of the royal courts'. It is regarded by some scholars as the more original version of the language. Iran, having a larger population, a stronger economy and closer ties to the rest of the world has developed its language further in the course of history. Afghanistan took a more conservative approach mainly due to lack of resources. As a result, Dari has not changed much over the last few centuries.
Many of the famous Persian language poets of 10th to 15th centuries stem from what is now known as Afghanistan. They were mostly also scholars in many disciplines like languages, natural sciences, medicine, religion and astronomy. Examples are Mawlvi Balkhi (Rumi), born and educated in the Balkh province in the 13th century and moved to today s Istanbul, Sanaayi Ghaznavi (12th century, native of Ghazni provice), Jami Heravi (15th century, native of Jam e Herat in western Afghanistan), Nizam ud Din Ali Sher Heravi Nava'i, (15th century, Heart province). Also, some of the contemporary Persian language poets and writers, who are relatively well know in both Iran and Afghanistan includes Ustad Behtab, Khalilullah Khalili , Parwin Pazwak and others.
In addition to poets, the region of Afghanistan produced numerous scientists as well including Avicenna (Ibn Sina Balkhi) who hailed from Balkh. Avicenna, who travelled to Isfahan later in life to establish a medical school there, is known by some scholars as "the father of modern medicine". George Sarton called Ibn Sina "the most famous scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places, and times." His most famous works are ''The Book of Healing'' and ''The Canon of Medicine'', also known as the Qanun. Avicenna's story even found way to the contemporary English literature through Noah Gordon's The Physician , now published in many languages.
Before the Taliban gained power, the city of Kabul was home to many musicians who were masters of both traditional and modern Afghan music, especially during the Nauroz celebration. Kabul in the middle part of the 20th century has been likened to Vienna during the 18th and 19th centuries.
The tribal system, which orders the life of most people outside metropolitan areas, is certainly as potent in political terms as the national state system of Europe 1914. Men feel a fierce loyalty to their own tribe, such that, if called upon, assemble in arms under the tribal chiefs and local clan leaders (Khans) in the same way that men throughout Europe "flocked to the colours" in 1914, forming up in regional divisions and battalions under the command of the local nobility and gentry. In theory, under Islamic law, every believer has an obligation to bear arms at the ruler's call (Ulul Amr), but this was no more needed than was enforced conscription to fill the ranks of the British Army in 1914. The Afghan shepherd or peasant went to war for much the same mixture of reasons as the more "civilised" European clerk or factory worker a desire for adventure, a desire not to be left out or lose esteem in the eyes of his fellows, a contempt for invading foreigners, revenge against those that ruined his family life or threatened his faith, perhaps even the chance of extra cash or enhanced personal prospects.
The tribal system is not something particularly backward or warlike. It is simply the best way of organizing large groups of people in a country that is geographically difficult, and in a society that has an uncomplicated lifestyle from a materialistic point of view (Heathcote, 2003).
Reference:
Heathcote, Tony (1980, 2003) "The Afghan Wars 1839 1919", Sellmount Staplehurst
See also: Radio Kabul, music of Afghanistan, Islam in Afghanistan
Education
''Main article: Education in Afghanistan''
In the spring of 2003, it was estimated that 30 of Afghanistan's 7,000 schools had been seriously damaged during more than two decades of Soviet occupation and civil war. Only half of the schools were reported to have clean water, while fewer than an estimated 40 had adequate sanitation. Education for boys was not a priority during the Taliban regime, and girls were banished from schools outright.
In regards to the poverty and violence of their surroundings, a study in 2002 by the Save the Children aid group said Afghan children were resilient and courageous. The study credited the strong institutions of family and community.
Up to four million Afghan children, possibly the largest number ever, are believed to have enrolled for class for the school year beginning in March of 2003. Education is available for both girls and boys.
Literacy of the entire population is estimated at 36 , Male Literacy rate is 51 and female literacy is 21 . The male literacy rate is higher because previous Taliban laws prohibited the education of women.
Higher Education The American University of Afghanistan
Another aspect of education that is rapidly changing in Afghanistan is the face of Higher Education. In 2006 the American University of Afghanistan and other donors. With the aim of providing a world class, English language, co educational learning environment in Afghanistan, the university will take students from Afghanistan and the region.
See also
Afghan Scout Association
Communications in Afghanistan
Foreign relations of Afghanistan
List of sovereign states
Military of Afghanistan
Transportation in Afghanistan
Stamps and postal history of Afghanistan
List of birds on stamps of Afghanistan
List of fish on stamps of Afghanistan
Golden Needle Sewing School
Taliban treatment of women
Taliban
List of leaders of Afghanistan
Additional references
Ghobar, Mit Gholam Mohammad. Afghanistan in the Cource of History, 1999, All Prints Inc.
Griffiths, John C. 1981. ''Afghanistan: A History of Conflict''. Andr Deutsch, London. Updated edition, 2001. Andre Deutsch Ltd, 2002, ISBN 0233050531.
Levi, Peter. 1972. ''The Light Garden of the Angel King: Journeys in Afghanistan''. Collins, 1972, ISBN 0002110423. Bobbs Merrill Company, 1973, Indianapolis New York, ISBN 0672512521.
Moorcroft, William and Trebeck, George. 1841. ''Travels in the Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjab in Ladakh and Kashmir, in Peshawar, Kabul, Kunduz, and Bokhara... from 1819 to 1825'', Vol. II. Reprint: New Delhi, Sagar Publications, 1971. Oxford University Press, 1979, ISBN 0195771990.
Rashid, Ahmed (2000) "Taliban Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in Central Asia", Yale University Press
Toynbee, Arnold J. 1961. ''Between Oxus and Jumna''. Oxford University Press, London. ISBN B0006DBR44.
Wood, John. 1872. ''A Journey to the Source of the River Oxus''. New Edition, edited by his son, with an essay on the "Geography of the Valley of the Oxus" by Henry Yule. John Murray, London. Gregg Division McGraw Hill, 1971, ISBN 0576033227.
Heathcote, T.A. The Afghan Wars 1839 1999, 1980,2003, Spellmount Staplehurst
External links
.
.
provided by joint UN projects
includes Background Notes, Country Study (1997), Rebuilding, USAID and NATO
directory category
directory category
(PDF)
A series of short films by the Washington Post on the New Afghanistan
Index of News, Analysis, and Opinion from many sources
Books written by the celebrated Afghan Scholar Mawlana Faizani
Category:Central Asian countries
Category:Landlocked countries
Category:Middle Eastern countries
Category:Near Eastern countries
Category:SAARC members
af:Afghanistan
als:Afghanistan
an:Afganist n
ar:
ast:Afganist n
bg:
bs:Afganistan
ca:Afganistan
cs:Afgh nist n
cy:Afghanistan
da:Afghanistan
de:Afghanistan
el:
eo:Afganio
es:Afganist n
et:Afganistan
fa:
fi:Afganistan
fr:Afghanistan
fur:Afghanistan
fy:Afganistan
ga:An Afganast in
gd:Afghanistan
gl:Afganist n
gu:
he:
hi:
hr:Afganistan
ht:Afganistan
hu:Afganiszt n
ia:Afghanistan
id:Afganistan
io:Afganistan
is:Afganistan
it:Afghanistan
ja:
ka:
ko:
ku:Afganistan
la:Afgania
lb:Afghanistan
li:Afganistan
lt:Afganistanas
lv:Afganist na
ml:
mo:
ms:Afghanistan
na:Afganistan
nds:Afghanistan
nl:Afghanistan
nn:Afghanistan
no:Afghanistan
os:
pl:Afganistan
ps:
pt:Afeganist o
ro:Afganistan
ru:
sa:
scn:Afganist n
se:Afghanistan
simple:Afghanistan
sk:Afganistan
sl:Afganistan
sq:Afganistani
sr:
sv:Afghanistan
ta:
tg:
th:
tk:Owganystan
tl:Afghanistan
tr:Afganistan
udm:
uk:
vi:Afghanistan
zh:
zh min nan:Afghanistan
Infobox Country
native name Republika e Shqip ris
common name Albania
image flag Flag of Albania.svg
image coat Albania state emblem.png 150px
image map LocationAlbania.png
national motto (not verified) Feja e Shqiptarit sht Shqiptaria (Albanian: The faith of the Albanian is Albanianism)
national anthem Hymni i Flamurit
official languages Albanian
capital Tirana
latd 41 latm 20 latNS N longd 19 longm 48 longEW E
largest city Tirana
government type emerging democracy
leader titles President br Prime Minister
leader names Alfred Moisiu br Sali Berisha
area rank 139th
area magnitude 1 E10
area 28,748
areami 11,100 ! Do not remove
percent water 4.7
population estimate 3,563,112
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 126
population census
population census year
population density 123
population densitymi 318.6 ! Do not remove
population density rank 63
GDP PPP year 2003
GDP PPP 15.7 billion
GDP PPP rank 112th
GDP PPP per capita 4,900
GDP PPP per capita rank 105th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.780
HDI rank 72nd
HDI category font color " FFCC00"medium font
sovereignty type Independence
established events
established dates From Ottoman Empire brNovember 28, 1912
currency Lek
currency code ALL
country code al
time zone CET
utc offset 1
time zone DST CEST
utc offset DST 2
cctld .al
calling code 355
footnotes
''This article is about Albania, the country on the Adriatic coast of the Balkans. For other historic uses, see Albania (disambiguation).
'''Albania''' (Albanian: ''Republika e Shqip ris '', IPA ) is a Mediterranean country in southeastern Europe. It is bordered by Serbia and Montenegro in the north, the Republic of Macedonia in the east, and Greece in the south it has a coast on the Adriatic Sea in the west, and a coast on the Ionian Sea in the southwest. The country is an emerging democracy and is formally named the '''Republic of Albania'''.
History
''Main articles: Illyria, Illyricum, Dalmatia, History of Albania.''
The earlier inhabitants were probably part of the pre Indo European populace that occupied the coastline of most parts of the Mediterranean. Their physical remains are scarce though, and concentrated on the coastal region. Soon, these first inhabitants were overrun by the Proto Hellenic tribes that gradually occupied modern day Greece, southern parts of what is now the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the south of present day Albania. This process was completed over the second millennium BC and did not really affect northern or central Albania, an area that at the time presented the image of a political vacuum (in essence a historical paradox).
Historians do not agree over the origin of the Illyrians. Some of them maintain that the Illyrians descended from the pre Indo European Pelasgians, while most scholars place them in the later wave of Indo European invasions. Their presence can be traced back to 900 BC, when their political structure was formulated in the 7th and 6th centuries BC. Excellent metal craftsmen and fierce warriors, the Illyrians formed warlord based kingdoms that fought amongst themselves for most of their history. Only during the 6th century did the Illyrians venture significant raids against their immediate neighbours: the kingdom of the Molossians in southern Albania, the kingdom of Macedon, and the kingdom of Paionia.
Besides warfare, the Illyrians were also peaceful traders of agricultural products and metal works. The Illyrian culture was heavily influenced by the Greek culture (mainly the south Illyrian tribes). Albania is also the site of several ancient Greek colonies.
Macedonian Rule
Probably their most important success was the slaughter of Perdiccas III, king of Macedon. Unfortunately for the Illyrians, Perdiccas was succeeded by Philip II, father of Alexander the Great, who effectively terminated the Illyrian aggression, effectively ending any dominant control by the Illyrians in the region.
Roman and Byzantine Rule
After being conquered by the Roman Empire, Illyria was reorganized as a Roman province, Illyricum, later divided into the provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia, the lands comprising Albania mostly being included in Dalmatia. Later, the Byzantine Empire governed the region. It was also ruled by the Bulgarian and Serbian Empire. After centuries, use of the name ''Illyria'' to denote the region fell out of fashion.
Ottoman Rule
In the middle ages, the name ''Albania'' (see ''Origin and history of the name Albania'') began to be increasingly applied to the region now comprising the nation of Albania. From 1443 to 1468 Gjergj Kastrioti Skenderbeu led a successful resistance against the invading Ottomans. After the death of Skenderbeg, resistance continued until 1478, although with only moderate success. The loyalties and alliances created and nurtured by Skenderbeg faltered and fell apart, and the Ottomans conquered the territory of Albania shortly after the fall of the castle Kruje. '''Albania''' then became part of the Ottoman Empire. Following this, many Albanians fled to neighboring Italy, and the majority of the '''Albanian''' population that remained converted to Islam. They would remain a part of the Ottoman Empire until 1912.
Effects of the Balkan Wars
After the Second Balkan War, the Ottomans were removed from Albania and there was a possibility of the lands being absorbed by Serbia, and the southern tip by Greece. This decision angered the Italians who did not want Serbia to have an extended coastline, and it angered the Germans who could build a railway to reach the Orient. Berlin then held discussions with Russia (the superpower in charge of Serbia) and with Greece. Eventually, it was decided that the country should not be divided but instead consolidated into the Principality of Albania under a German prince,William of Wied. When the German prince was expelled by the Albanian people after 6 months as the self named "King of Albania", Great Britain, France, and Italy, as members the League of Nations, wanted to divide the territory once and for all. Intervention by United States of America president Woodrow Wilson vetoed the vote and allowed Albania to retain its status. From 1928, the country was ruled by King Zog I until 1938 when it became a puppet of Italy.
World War II and Enver Hoxha Rule
Albanian communists and nationalists actively fought a partisan war against the Italian and German invasions in WW II. Certain smaller organizations helped the foreign invaders, but it was the communists who took over after World War II. In November 1944 the communists gained control of the government under the leader of the resistance, Enver Hoxha . From 1945 until 1990 Albania had one of the most repressive governments in Europe. The communist party was created in 1941 with the help of Bolshevik Communist Parties. All those who opposed it were eliminated.
For the many decades under his domination, Hoxha created and destroyed relationships with Belgrade, Moscow, and China, always in his personal interests. The country was isolated, first from the West (Western Europe, North America and Australasia) and later even from the communist East.
The Fall of Communism and Democratic Albania
In 1985, Enver Hoxha died and Ramiz Alia took his place. Initially, Alia tried to follow in Hoxha's footsteps, but in Eastern Europe changes had already started: Mikhail Gorbachev had appeared in the Soviet Union with new policies (Glasnost and perestroika). The Albanian totalitarian regime was under pressure from the US, Europe, and the anger and despair of its own people. After Nicolae Ceau escu (the communist leader of Romania) was executed in a revolution, Alia knew he would be next if changes were not made. He signed the Helsinki Agreement (which was signed by other countries in 1975) that respected some human rights. He also allowed pluralism, and even though his party won the election of 1991 it was clear that the change would not be stopped. In 1992 the general elections were won by the Democratic Party with 62 of the votes.
In the general elections of June, 1996 the Democratic Party tried to win an absolute majority and manipulated the results. In 1997 an epidemic of pyramid schemes sent shockwaves through the entire country's economy, and riots started. Police stations and military bases were looted of millions of weaponry, Kalashnikovs. Anarchy prevailed, and many cities were controlled by militia and less organized armed citizens. Even US military advisors left the country for their own safety. In response to the anarchy, the Socialist Party won the early elections of 1997.
However, stability was far from being restored in the years after the 1997 riots. The power feuds raging inside the Socialist Party led to a series of short lived Socialist governments. The country was flooded with refugees from neighboring Kosovo in 1998 and 1999. In June, 2002, a compromise candidate, Alfred Moisiu, a former general and defense minister, was elected to succeed President Meidani. Parliamentary elections in July, 2005, brought back to power Sali Berisha, Leader of the Democratic Party, mostly owing to Socialist infighting and a series of corruption scandals plaguing the Nano government.
Since 1990 Albania has been diplomatically oriented towards the West, it was accepted to the Council of Europe and has requested membership of NATO. The work force of Albania has continued to emigrate to Greece, Italy, Europe and North America. Corruption in the government is becoming more and more obvious. Any hope for a short and not too painful transition after Communism has long since been dashed.
Politics
''Main article:'' Politics of Albania
The head of state is the president, who is elected by the ''Kuvendi'', or the Assembly of the Republic of Albania every 5 years. The main part of the Assembly's 140 members is elected every 4 years. 100 of the parliament's members are chosen by the people with a direct vote, while the other 40 members are chosen using a proportional system. The head of government is the Prime Minister who is assisted by a council of ministers. The Council of Ministers is selected by the Prime Minister (A process called "forming the government") and then approved by a simple majority (71 votes) in the Assembly.
Administrative divisions
''Main articles: Districts of Albania and Counties of Albania''
Albania is divided into 12 ''qark'' (county or prefecture), which are further divided into 36 ''rrethe'' (districts). The capital city, Tiran , has a special status. The districts are:
small1 small Berat
small2 small Bulqiz
small3 small Delvin
small4 small Devoll
small5 small Dib r
small6 small Durr s
small7 small Elbasan
small8 small Fier
small9 small Gjirokast r
small10 small Gramsh
small11 small Has
small12 small Kavaj
small13 small Kolonj
small14 small Kor
small15 small Kruj
small16 small Ku ov
small17 small Kuk s
small18 small Kurbin
small19 small Lezh
small20 small Librazhd
small21 small Lushnj
small22 small Mal si e Madhe
small23 small Mallakast r
small24 small Mat
small25 small Mirdit
small26 small Peqin
small27 small P rmet
small28 small Pogradec
small29 small Puk
small30 small Sarand
small31 small Shkod r
small32 small Skrapar
small33 small Tepelen
small34 small Tiran
small35 small Tropoj
small36 small Vlor
See also: List of cities in Albania (''Note: some cities have the same name as the district they are in'').
Geography
''Main article: Geography of Albania''
Albania consists of mostly hilly and mountainous terrain, the highest mountain, Korab in the district of Dibra reaching up to 2,753 metres (9,032ft). The country mostly has a continental climate, with cold winters and hot summers.
Besides capital city Tirana, with 800,000 inhabitants, the principal cities are Durr s, Elbasan, Shkod r, Gjirokast r, Vlor and Kor . In Albanian grammar a word can have indefinite and definite forms, and this also applies to city names: so both Tiran and Tirana, Shkod r and Shkodra are used.
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Albania''
In Albania, half of the economically active population still engaged in agriculture and a fifth works abroad.
The country has almost no exports, and imports most if its goods from Greece and Italy. Money for imports comes from financial aid and from the money that immigrants working abroad mostly in neighbouring Greece bring to Albania. This is a good status quo business for both Greece and Italy.
Albania's coastline on the Ionian Sea, near the Greek tourist island of Corfu, is becoming increasingly popular with foreign visitors due to its relatively unspoilt nature and good beaches. However, the tourist industry is still in its infancy.
Growth was strong 2003 05 and inflation is not a problem.
GDP(purchasing power parity): 18.05 billion
Note: Albania has a large gray economy that may be as large as 50 of official GDP. (2005 est.)
GDP (official exchange rate): 8.741 billion (2005 est.)
GDP (real growth rate): 6 (2005 est.)
GDP composition by sector:
agriculture: 23.6
industry: 20.5
services: 55.9 (2005 est.)
Exports: 708 million f.o.b. (2005 est.)
Imports: 2.473 billion f.o.b. (2005 est.)
Aid per Capita: 52 US
External Debt: 1.41 billion (2003 est.)
Defence Expenditure: (n a)
Children in Labour Force: 1 of children aged 10 14 work
Demographics
''Main article: Demographics of Albania''
Most of the population is ethnically Albanian (95 according to the CIA World Factbook Feb 2005), there is a Greek minority (3 of the population), this however could significally vary according to other sources, (note: in 1989, other estimates of the Greek population ranged from 1 (official Albanian statistics) to 12 (from a Greek organization) Since 1991, large numbers of Albanians have emigrated, both legally and illegally, to Greece and Italy.
The language is Albanian, although Greek is also spoken by the Greek minority in the southern regions of the country.
At the height of the Ottoman occupation, the majority of Albanians were mostly Muslim (70 ), even though religion was prohibited during the communist era. The Albanian government proclaimed Albania the only officially atheistic country in the world. After the fall of the Communist Regime in 1989 1990 religions were reinstated. According to 1939 statistics, the Albanian Orthodox (20 ) and Roman Catholic Church (10 ) would be the other main religions in Albania. Religious fanaticism has never been a serious problem, with people from different religions living in peace and even getting married although this was not considered to be an optimal solution. 20 of the total Muslim population is Bektashi, people who follow a faith originating in the Turkish migrations into Turkey, and came to Albania through the Ottoman Janissaries. It has outwardly Shi'ite Islamic elements, but is really a Shamanic Pantheistic faith.
Culture
''Main article: Culture of Albania''
Albanian Literature
Cuisine of Albania
Music of Albania
Sport in Albania
Radio Televizioni Shqiptar
Top Channel TV
Miscellaneous topics
List of Albania related articles
List of Albanians
Islam in Albania
Albanian mythology
Beslidhja Skaut Albania
List of sovereign states
Communications in Albania
Education in Albania
Foreign relations of Albania
Military of Albania
Transportation in Albania
Public holidays in Albania
List of Albanian Americans
Albanians in Italy
Butrint National Park
The Jewish Community of Albania
Albanian Actors
External links
Albanian Language
throughout history
Discussion Forum
CIA's Factbook on Albania
(in Albanian)
Official government websites
(Albanian and English)
(Albanian)
(Albanian and English)
(Albanian and English)
(Albanian, English and French)
(Albanian and English)
(Albanian and English)
af:Albani
als:Albanien
ang:Albania
ar:
an:Albania
roa rup:Albanii
ast:Albania
bg:
zh min nan:Shqip ria
be:
bn:
bs:Albanija
ca:Alb nia
chr:
cs:Alb nie
cy:Albania
da:Albanien
de:Albanien
et:Albaania
el:
es:Albania
eo:Albanio
eu:Albania
fa:
fo:Albania
fr:Albanie
fy:Albaanje
fur:Albanie
gd:Alb inia
gl:Albania Shqip ria
ko:
ht:Albani
hy:
hi:
hr:Albanija
io:Albania
id:Albania
ia:Albania
is:Alban a
it:Albania
he:
ka:
kw:Albani
ku:Elbanya
la:Albania
lv:Alb nija
lt:Albanija
lb:Albanien
li:Albani
hu:Alb nia
mk:
mg:Albania
mt:Albanija
ms:Albania
na:Albania
nl:Albani
nds:Albanien
ja:
no:Albania
nn:Albania
oc:Albania
ps:
pl:Albania
pt:Alb nia
ro:Albania
ru:
se:Alb nia
sa:
sq:Shqip ria
simple:Albania
sk:Alb nsko
sl:Albanija
sr:
fi:Albania
sv:Albanien
tl:Albanya
th:
tr:Arnavutluk Cumhuriyeti
uk:
zh:
fiu vro:Albaania
:''For a king of Anglo Saxon England, see Aella of Deira or Aelle II of Northumbria or Aelle of Sussex.''
:''Men's names uAllah ed din u and similar are misspellings for Ala ud din and see here for other sorts of error.''
The word '''''' is the Arabic term for "God". In other languages, it is often used to refer specifically to the Islamic concept of God: see "Usage" below.
Etymology
Usage
Although, outside the Arab world, use of the word ''All h'' is most often associated with Islam, it is not exclusive to that faith Arab Christians and various Arabic speaking Jews (including the Teimanim, several communities and some Sephardim) also use it to refer to the monotheist deity. Arabic translations of the Bible also employ it, as do Roman Catholics in Malta (who pronounce it as "Alla"), Christians in Indonesia, who say "Allah Bapa" (God the Father) and Christians in the Middle East who use the Aramaic "All ha".
"Allah" as a word
Many linguists believe that the term ''All h'' is derived from a contraction of the Arabic words ''al'' (the) and '' il h'' (deity, masculine form) ''al il h'' meaning "the god." In addition, one of the main pagan goddesses of pre Islamic Arabia, All t (''al'' '' il h'' ''at'', or 'the goddess'), is cited as being etymologically (though not synchronically) the feminine linguistic counterpart to the grammatically masculine All h. If so, the word ''All h'' is an abbreviated title, meaning 'the deity', rather than a name. For this reason, both Muslim and non Muslim scholars often translate All h directly into English as 'God' this also explains why Arabic speaking Jews and Christians freely refer to God as All h. However, some Muslim scholars feel that "All h" should not be translated, because they perceived the Arabic word to express the uniqueness of "All h" more accurately than the word "god", which can take a plural "gods", whereas the word "All h" has no plural form. This is a significant issue in translation of the Qur'an.
.
The word ''All h'' is always written without an alif to spell the '' '' vowel. This is because the spelling was settled before Arabic spelling started habitually using alif to spell '' ''. However, in vocalized spelling, a diacritic ''alif'' is added on top of the ''shaddah'' to indicate pronunciation. One exception is in the pre Islamic Zabad inscription, where it is spelled .
Unicode has glyph reserved for Allah, U FDF2, which can be combined with an alif to yield the post consonantal form, , as opposed to the full spelling ''alif l m l m h '' which may be rendered slightly differently, in particular featuring a diacritic ''alif'' on top of the ''shadda''. In this, Unicode imitates traditional Arabic typesetting, which also frequently featured special ''ll h'' types.
Also In ''Abjad numerals'', The Name Of Allah () numeric value is 66.
Islamic use of "All h"
From the point of view of traditional Islamic theology, All h is the most precious name of God because it is not a descriptive name like other ninety nine names of God, but the name of God's own presence. Muslims believe that the name of Allah had existed before the time of Adam. It is the same God worshipped by Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad and other prophets of Islam. In Islam, there is only one God and Muhammad is the last messenger.
The emphasis in Islamic culture on reciting the Qur'an in Arabic has resulted in ''All h'' often being used by Muslims world wide as the word for ''God'', regardless of their native language. Out of 114 Suras in the Qur'an, 113 begin with the Basmala ("Bismi 'll hi 'r rahm ni 'r rah m" ) which means "In the name of God, the most kind, the most merciful".
Muslims, when referring to the name, often add the words "Subhanahu wa Ta ala" after it, meaning "Glorified and Exalted is He" as a sign of reverence, or " Azza wa Jalla" ( ). The entire religion of Islam is based on the idea of getting closer to God. Although commonly referred to as a "He", God is considered genderless, but there is no neuter gender to express this in the Arabic language. When Greek or other polytheistic deities are discussed in Arabic, it is customary to use the expression ''il h'', a "deity" or lower case "god" sometimes the word ''ma b d'', literally meaning "worshipped entity ", is used instead.
Uses of "All h" in phrases
There are many phrases that contain the word All h:
All hu Akbar ( ) (God is the greatest)
A'uzu billahi minashaitanir rajim (I seek refuge in Allah from Shaitan, the damned)
Bismi ll h ( ) (In the name of God)
Insh 'All h ( ) (God willing)
:also the origin of the common Spanish interjection "Ojal ", which shares a similar meaning.
:probably also the origin of the Portuguese interjection ''Oxal '', "let's hope for it" or "let's hope that...".
Y All h ( )(Oh God)
:may be the origin of the Spanish and Portuguese exclamation "Ol !".
M sh ' All h ( ) ( Look at what God has willed!)
Subh n All h ( ) (Glory be to God)
al Hamdu li ll h ( ) (All praise be to God)
All hu A alam ( ) (God knows best)
Jazaka All hu khayran ( ) (May God reward you for your deeds)
"All h" appears in a stylized form on the flag of Iran, in the phrase "All hu Akbar" on the flag of Iraq, and as part of the shah dah on the flag of Saudi Arabia.
"Allah" is not correctly used as a man's name. See Arabic name Mistakes made by Europeans and other non Arabs.
Islamic concept of God
The Islamic concept of mankind's place in the universe hinges on the notion that '''All h''', or '''God''', is the only true reality. There is nothing permanent other than Him. God is considered eternal and "uncreated", whereas everything else in the universe is "created." The Qur'an describes Him in Sura 112: "Say: He is All h, Singular. All h, the Absolute. He begetteth not nor was begotten. And to Him have never been one equal." (see Tawhid for more). The Qur'an condemns and mocks the pre Islamic Arabs for attributing daughters to All h (sura 53:19.)
Muslims believe that All h, or God, is the only true God who deserves to be worshipped. This belief must be accompanied by the acknowledgement that Mohammad was a true prophet of God who was chosen to guide people to believing and worshipping God in the correct manner. God is considered eternal and uncreated with no beginning, whereas everything else in the universe is created with a beginning. The Qur'an mentions, (approximated in English) Sura 112: "Say: He is All h, Without partner. All h, the Absolute. He begetteth not nor was begotten. And to Him have never been one equal." (see Tawhid for more).
God is considered by Muslims to be omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient. In the Qur'an, God is described as being fully aware of everything that happens in the universe, and knows all things. God also knows what is in people's hearts and minds at all times. It is mentioned in the Qur'an (approximately), "And He it is Who takes your souls at night (in sleep), and He knows what you acquire in the day, then He raises you up therein that an appointed term may be fulfilled then to Him is your return, then He will inform you of what you were doing. (sura 6:60)"
Placing God inside his creation, or suggesting that nature or creation simultaneously co exist in God or vice versa, as in other religious traditions, completely compromises exclusive Islamic monotheism. Attributing a partner, spouse, father, son, daughter, mother or other relation(s) to Allah, literally or metaphorically, partially or completely, is considered unquestionably blasphemous by Muslims.
Therefore, Muslims consider it blasphemous to describe Jesus (or another man, woman child etc) as 'Son of God' whether literally or metaphorically. Similarly, Muslims do not believe that God resembles a man (old or young), woman, half man half woman, half man half animal , bird, elephant or other animal or other creation. It is forbidden for Muslims to view God anthropomorphically.
Allah does not resemble any of his creations in any way whatsoever. Allah is not attributed with shape, colour, size, position, location, direction and indeed all of these attributes are found in the creatures Allah created.
Further, Muslims do not believe that Allah is located in a place, whether on Earth, below the Earth, in the Sky, above the Sky, on a Throne above the Sky or all of these places at once or anywhere else or everywhere, but rather, God exists without a place (given he created all places and locations) and the perfectness of his existence is not compromised by his existence not being bound to a created (by Allah) place or location.
God is attributed with complete perfection in his attributes and is free from any defects or any imperfections. Allah is attributed (amongst other attributes) with oneness (without a partner in God's self or attributes), non beginningness, eternalness, complete freedom from needing others (i.e. each or any of his creations), complete power to do all things, Will (to do as he wills, as and when God decides without any obstruction), knowledge, (of all things simultaneously, past, present and future) hearing (of all sounds without needing any implement or organ to hear), sight (without needing eyes or any other organ or instrument nor light rays to illuminate an area or an object), life (unlike the human or other life which is created and limited, but that which befits him with no beginning or end), speech (unlike the human, created speech which is constituted of languages, letters and sounds but rather an eternal speech which is not a creation but an attribute of God) and the complete non resemblence of any creation in his self or attributes.
History
It was used in pre Islamic times by Pagans within the Arabian peninsula to signify the supreme creator. Pre Islamic Jews referred to their supreme creator as Yahweh or Elohim. The pagan Arabs recognized "All h" as the supreme God in their pantheon along with Allah, however, the pre Islamic Arabs believed in a host of other gods, such as Hubal and 'daughters of All h' (the three daughters associated were al L t, al Uzzah, and Manah) (Encyclopedia of World Mythology and Legend, ''"The Facts on File"'', ed. Anthony Mercatante, New York, 1983, I:61). This view of Allah by the pre Islamic pagans is viewed by Muslims as a latter development having arisen as a result of moving away from Abrahamic monotheism over time. Some of the names of these pagan gods are said to be derived from the descendants of Noah, whom latter generations firstly revered as saints, and then transformed into gods (although non Muslims often view polytheism as having come before monotheism). The pagan Arabians also used the word "All h" in the names of their children Muhammad's father, who was born into pagan society, was named " Abdull h", which translates "servant of All h". " Abdull h" is still used for names of Muslim and non Muslim arabs.
The Hebrew word for deity, El ( ) or El ah ( ), was used as an Old Testament synonym for Yahweh ( ), which is the proper name for the Jewish God according to the Tanakh. The Aramaic word for God is ''al h '' (Syriac dialect) or el h (Biblical dialect), which comes from the same Proto Semitic word ('' il h '') as the Arabic and Hebrew terms Jesus is described in Mark 15:34 as having used the word on the cross, with the ending meaning "my", when saying, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (transliterated in Greek as ''el i''). One of the earliest surviving translations of the word into a foreign language is in a Greek translation of the Shahada, from 86 96 AH (705 715 AD), which translates it as ''ho theos monos'', literally "the one god". Also the cognate Aramaic term appears in the Aramaic version of the ''New Testament'', called the Pshitta (or Peshitta) as one of the words Jesus used to refer to God, e.g., in the sixth Beatitude, "Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see Al ha." And in the Arabic Bible the same words (Mt 5:8): " "
Other beliefs
The Nation of Gods and Earths, one of the many sects created as the result of black separatist movements in the United States, holds that the word "All h" is the name of the original black man and stands for "Arm, Leg, Leg, Arm, Head". This concept is alien to mainstream Islam, which strictly opposes any attempt to portray All h as a human or in any other way. Mainstream Islam also prohibits attibuting divine qualities to, worshipping, or glorifying anything other than All h.
The Bah ' Faith, whose scriptures are primarily written in Arabic and Farsi, also uses '''Allah''' to mean God, though in practice the customary word for God in the local language is typically used when speaking in that language. Some particular uses are not translated, but the Arabic phrase is used. The chief example of this would be the Bah ' customary greeting '''All h'u'abh ''' which is commonly translated as ''God is the All Glorious''.
See also
God
Islam
99 Names of God
Muhammad
Monotheism
External Links
For further discussion on Allah, the word's etymology, and the Islamic concept
Category:Islam
Category:Arabian deities
Category:Deities
Category:Quran
Category:Singular God
Category:Aqidah
af:Allah
ar:
bs:Allah
ca:Al l
da:Allah
de:Allah
et:Allah
es:Al
fa:
fr:Allah
ko:
id:Allah
is:All h
it:Allah
hu:Allah
ms:Allah
nl:Allah
ja:
no:Allah
nn:Allah
pl:Allah
pt:Al
ru:
simple:Allah
sr:
fi:Allah
sv:Allah
tt:Allah
th:
tr:Allah
uk:
zh:
border 1 align right cellpadding 4 cellspacing 0 width 250 style "margin: 0 0 1em 1em background: f9f9f9 border: 1px aaaaaa solid border collapse: collapse font size: 95 "
bigbig'''Antarctica''' big big
align center colspan 2 style "background: f9f9f9 "
'''Area''' 14,000,000km (280,000km ice free, 13,720,000km ice covered)
'''Population''' 1,000 (none permanent)
'''Government''' None, governed by the Antarctic Treaty System
'''Partial Territorial claims''' br br br br br br
'''Internet TLD''' .aq
'''Calling Code''' 672
:''For the Kim Stanley Robinson novel, see Antarctica (novel)''
'''Antarctica''' (Greek, ''antarktikos'': "opposite the Arctic"refHenry George Liddell, Robert Scott, ''A Greek English Lexicon '' . Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref) is a continent encircling the Earth's South Pole, surrounded by the Southern Ocean and divided in two by the Transantarctic Mountains. It is a cold desert and, on average, the coldest place on Earth. 98 of the continent is covered by ice. Its 14 millionkm make it the fifth largest continent and the world's largest desert. There are no permanent human residents, and only cold adapted plants and animals survive there, including penguins, fur seals, lichens, and hundreds of types of algae.
Although myths and speculation about a ''Terra Australis'' ("Southern Land") go back to antiquity, the first commonly accepted sighting of the continent occurred in 1820 and the first verified landing in 1821 by the Russian expedition of Mikhail Lazarev and Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen. The continent had been largely neglected in the 19th century because of its hostile environment, lack of efficient resources, and its isolated location.
Antarctica is not under the political sovereignty of any nation, although seven countries (Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Norway, New Zealand and the United Kingdom) maintain territorial claims. Most other countries do not recognise these claims, and the claims of Argentina, Chile and the United Kingdom all overlap. Its usage is regulated by the Antarctic Treaty, signed in 1959 by 12 countries, which prohibits any military activity, supports scientific research, and protects the continent's ecozone. Ongoing experiments are conducted yearly by more than 4,000 scientists of diverse backgrounds and interests.
Exploration
's Imperial Trans Antarctic Expedition in 1914.
In the Western world, beliefs in a ''Terra Australis'' a vast continent located in the far south of the globe to "balance" out the northern lands of Europe, Asia and north Africa had existed for centuries. Even by late in the 17th century, after explorers had found that South America and Australia were not part of "Antarctica", geographers believed the continent was much larger than its true size. European maps continued to show this land until Captain James Cook and the crews of his expedition's ships, ''Resolution'' and ''Adventure'', crossed the Antarctic Circle on January 17, 1773 and again in 1774.refThe Mariners' Museum . Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref
The first confirmed sighting of Antarctica cannot be accurately attributed to one single person. It can, however, be narrowed down to three individuals. According to various organizations (the National Science Foundation,refNational Science Foundation. Retrieved February 6, 2006. ref NASA,refNASA, U.S. Government Retrieved February 6, 2006. ref the University of California, San Diego,refUniversity of California, San Diego Retrieved February 5, 2006. ref and other sourcesrefSouth Pole . Retrieved February 12, 2006 refrefPolar Radar for Ice Sheet Measurements. . Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref), three men all sighted Antarctica within days or weeks of each other: Fabian von Bellingshausen (a captain in the Russian Imperial Navy), Edward Bransfield (a captain in the British navy), and Nathaniel Palmer (an American sealer out of Stonington, Connecticut). Bransfield supposedly saw Antarctica on January 27, 1820, three days before Palmer sighted land. It is certain that on January 28, 1820 the expedition led by Fabian von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Petrovich Lazarev on two ships reached a point within 32km (20miles) of the Antarctic mainland and saw ice fields there.
In 1841 explorer James Clark Ross sailed through what is now known as the Ross Sea and discovered Ross Island. He sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the Ross Ice Shelf. Mount Erebus and Mount Terror are named after two ships from his expedition: ''HMS Erebus'' and ''HMS Terror''.ref South Pole Exploring Antarctica. Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref
During an expedition by Ernest Shackleton, parties led by T. W. Edgeworth David became the first to climb Mount Erebus and to reach the South Magnetic Pole.refAustralian Antarctic Division. Retrieved February 7, 2006. ref On December 14, 1911, a party led by Norwegian polar explorer Roald Amundsen from the ship ''Fram'' became the first to reach the South Pole, using a route from the Bay of Whales and up the Axel Heiberg Glacier.refSouth pole South Pole Exploring Antarctica. Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
After Robert Falcon Scott's journey, Richard Evelyn Byrd led several voyages to the Antarctic by plane in the 1930s and 1940s. He is credited with implementing mechanized land transport and conducting extensive geological and biological research.ref70South. . Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref However, it was not until October 31, 1956 that anyone set foot on the South Pole again on that day a U.S. Navy group led by Rear Admiral George Dufek successfully landed on an aircraft.refU.S. Navy. . Retrieved February 12, 2006. ref
Geography
The continent of Antarctica is located mostly south of the Antarctic Circle, surrounded by the Southern Ocean. Antarctica is the southernmost land mass on Earth comprising more than 14 millionkm making it the 5th largest continent. The coastline measures 17,968km. Physically, Antarctica is divided in two by the Transantarctic Mountains close to the neck between the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea. The portion of the continent west of the Weddell Sea and east of the Ross Sea is called Western Antarctica and the remainder Eastern Antarctica, because they correspond roughly to the Eastern and Western Hemispheres relative to the Greenwich meridian. Western Antarctica is covered by the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. About 98 percent of Antarctica is covered by an ice sheet that is, on average, 2.5 kilometers thick. Vinson Massif, the highest peak in Antarctica at 4,892meters, is located in the Ellsworth Mountains. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet has been of recent concern because of the slight possibility of its collapse. If it does break down, ocean levels would rise by a few meters in a relatively short period of time. Despite its zero rainfall in some areas, the continent has approximately 90 of the world's fresh water in the form of ice.ref name "cia"Central Intelligence Agency Retrieved February 6, 2006. ref
, an active volcano in Ross Island.
Although Antarctica is home to many volcanoes, only Deception Island and Mt. Erebus are active. Mount Erebus, located in Ross Island, is the southernmost active volcano on Earth. Minor eruptions are frequent and lava flow has been observed in recent years. Other dormant volcanoes may potentially be active.refBritish Antarctic Survey. . Retrieved February 13, 2006. ref In 2004, an underwater volcano was found in the Antarctic Peninsula by American and Canadian researchers. Recent evidence shows this unnamed volcano may be active.refNational Science Foundation. . Retrieved February 13, 2006 ref
Antarctica is home to more than 70 lakes that lie thousands of metres under the surface of the continental ice sheet, including one under the South Pole itself. Lake Vostok, discovered beneath Russia's Vostok Station in 1996, is the largest of these subglacial lakes. It is believed that the lake has been sealed off for 35 million years. There is some evidence that Vostok's waters may contain microbial life. Due to the lake's similarity to Europa, a moon of Jupiter, confirming that life can survive in Lake Vostok might strengthen the argument for the presence of life on Europa.refNational Science Foundation Retrieved February 6, 2006. refrefNASA Retrieved February 4, 2006. ref
Geology
Gondwana breakup
More than 170 million years ago (Mya), Antarctica was part of the supercontinent Gondwana. Africa separated from Antarctica around 160 Mya follwed by India in the early Cretaceous (about 125 Mya). About 65 Mya, Antarctica (then still connected to Australia) had still tropical to subtropical climate, complete with a marsupial fauna, but by about 45 Mya Australia New Guinea had separated from Antarctica and the first ice appeared. At around 25 Mya, due to the opening of the Drake Passage between Antarctica and South America and the resulting Antarctic Circumpolar Current, the ice spread quickly, displacing the forests that then covered the continent. Since about 15 Mya, the continent has been mostly covered with ice.
Climate
covering Lake Fryxell, in the Transantarctic Mountains, comes from glacial meltwater from the Canada Glacier and other smaller glaciers.
Antarctica is the coldest place on earth. Antarctica has little rainfall, with the South Pole getting none, making it a continental desert. Temperatures reach a minimum of between 85 and 90 degrees Celsius (121 and 130 degrees Fahrenheit) in the winter and about 30degrees higher in the summer months. Sunburn is often a health issue as the snow surface reflects over 90 of the sunlight falling on it.ref name "weather"British Antarctic Survey. Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref Eastern Antarctica is colder than its western counterpart because of its higher elevation. Weather fronts rarely penetrate far into the continent, leaving the center cold and dry. There is little precipitation over the central portion of the continent, but ice there can last for extended time periods. However, heavy snowfalls are not uncommon on the coastal portion of the continent, where snowfalls of up to 1.22meters (48inches) in 48hours have been recorded. At the edge of the continent, strong katabatic winds off the polar plateau often blow at storm force. In the interior, however, wind speeds are often moderate. During summer more solar radiation reaches the surface at the South Pole than is received at the equator in an equivalent period.ref name "cia"
Depending on the latitude, long periods of constant darkness, or constant sunlight, mean that climates familiar to humans are not generally available on the continent. The aurora australis, commonly known as the southern lights, is a glow observed in the night sky near the south pole. Another unique spectacle is diamond dust. Diamond dust refers to a ground level cloud composed of tiny ice crystals. Diamond dust generally forms under otherwise clear or nearly clear skies, so people sometimes also refer to it as clear sky precipitation. A sundog, a frequent atmospheric optical phenomenon, is a bright "spot" beside the true sun.ref name "weather"
500px thumb center Tabletop icebergs in Antarctica
Population
through microscopes.
Although Antarctica has no permanent residents, a number of governments maintain permanent research stations throughout the continent. The population of persons doing and supporting science on the continent and its nearby islands varies from approximately 4,000 in summer to 1,000 in winter. Many of the stations are staffed around the year.
Emilio Marcos Palma was the first person born in Antarctica (Base Esperanza) in 1978, his parents being sent there along with seven other families by the Argentinean government to determine if family life was suitable in the continent. In 1986 Juan Pablo Camacho was born at the Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva Base, becoming the first Chilean born in Antarctica. Several bases are now home to families with children attending schools at the station.ref''The Antarctic Sun'' Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
Flora and fauna
Flora
s are known in Antarctica.
The climate of Antarctica does not allow for much vegetation to exist. A combination of freezing temperatures, soil quality, lack of moisture and sunlight limit the chances for plants to exist. As a result, plant life is limited to mostly mosses and liverworts. The autotrophic community is made up of mostly protists. The flora of the continent largely consists of lichens, bryophytes, algae, and fungi. Growth generally occurs in the summer and only for a few weeks, at most.
There are more than 200 species of lichens and approximately 50 species of bryophytes, such as mosses. Seven hundred species of algae exist, most of which are phytoplankton. Multicolored snow algae and diatoms are especially abundant in the coastal regions during the summer. There are two species of flowering plants found in the Antarctic Peninsula: Antarctic hair grass and Antarctic pearlwort.refAustralian Antarctic Division Retrieved February 5, 2006. ref
Fauna
s in Ross Sea, Antarctica.
Land fauna is completely invertebrate. Such invertebrate life includes microscopic mites, lice, and springtails. The midge, just 12 mm in size, is the largest land animal in Antarctica (other than man). The snow petrel is one of only three birds that breed exclusively in Antarctica and have been seen at the South Pole.
A variety of marine animals exist, and they rely, directly or indirectly, on the phytoplankton. Antarctic sea life includes penguins, blue whales, and fur seals. More specifically, the Emperor penguin is the only penguin that breeds during the winter in Antarctica. The Ad lie Penguin breeds further south than any penguin. The Rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around the eyes one could call them elaborate eyelashes. King penguins are also predominant in the Antarctic. The Antarctic fur seal was very heavily hunted in the 18th and 19th centuries for its pelt by sealers from the United States and the United Kingdom. Antarctic krill, which congregate in large schools, is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean, and is an important food organism for whales, seals, leopard seals, fur seals, squid, icefish, penguins, albatrosses and many other birds.ref Retrieved February 6, 2006. ref
The approval of the Antarctic Conservation Act brought several restrictions to the continent. The introduction of alien plants or animals can bring a criminal penalty, as can the extraction of any indigenous species. The overfishing of krill, which plays a large role in the Antarctic ecosystem, led officials to enact regulations on fishing. The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a treaty enacted in 1980, requires that regulations managing all Southern Ocean fisheries consider potential effects on the entire Antarctic ecosystem.ref name "cia" Despite these new acts, unregulated and illegal fishing, particularly of Patagonian toothfish, remains a serious problem. Particularly, the illegal fishing of toothfish has been increasing with estimates of 32,000tonnes in 2000.refBBC News. . Retrieved February 11, 2006. refrefAustralian Antarctic Division. . Retrieved February 11, 2006. ref
Politics
Antarctica is considered a neutral territory in respect to politics. The Antarctic Treaty, signed in 1959, and related agreements, collectively called the Antarctic Treaty System, regulate international relations with respect to Antarctica, Earth's only uninhabited continent. For the purposes of the treaty system, Antarctica is defined as all land and ice shelves south of the southern 60th parallel. The treaty was signed by 12 countries, including the Soviet Union and the United States, and set aside Antarctica as a scientific preserve, established freedom of scientific investigation, environmental protection, and banned military activity on that continent. This was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War. The Antarctic Treaty prohibits any measures of a military nature in Antarctica, such as the establishment of military bases and fortifications, the carrying out of military maneuvers, or the testing of any type of weapon. It permits the use of military personnel or equipment for scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes.refScientific Committee on Antarctic Research. Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
Antarctica has no government. Various countries claim areas of it, but most countries do not recognize those claims. The area between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west is the only land on Earth not claimed by any country.ref name "cia"
The only documented large scale land military maneuver was "Operaci n 90", undertaken 10 years before the Antarctic Treaty by the Argentinian military.refAntarctica Institute of Argentina. Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
The United States military issues the Antarctica Service Medal to military members or civilians who perform research duty on the Antarctica continent. The medal may include a winter over bar issued to those who remain on the continent for two complete six month seasons.refU.S. Navy Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
Antarctic territories
class "wikitable"
!Flag
!Territory
!Claimant
!Claim limits
!Date
Adelie Land
France
142 02'E to 136 '11'E
1924
Argentine Antarctica
Argentina
25 W to 74 W
1943
Australian Antarctic Territory
Australia
160 E to 142 02'E and 136 11'E to 44 38'E
1933
Ant rtica Chilena Province
Chile
53 W to 90 W
1940
British Antarctic Territory
United Kingdom
20 W to 80 W
1908
Dronning Maud LandbrPeter I Island
Norway
44 38'E to 20 Wbr 68 50'S, 90 35'W
1939br1929
Ross Dependency
New Zealand
150 W to 160 E
1923
The Argentinean, British and Chilean claims all overlap.
Germany also maintained a claim to Antarctica, known as New Swabia between 1939 and 1945. It was situated at 20 E and 10 W, overlapping Norway's claim.
Economy
has led to several arrests.
Although coal, hydrocarbons, iron ore, platinum, copper, chromium, nickel, gold and other minerals have been found, they exist in quantities too small to exploit. The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty prevents such struggle for resources. In 1998 a compromise agreement was reached to add a 50 year ban on mining until the year 2048, further limiting economic development and exploitation. The primary agricultural activity is the capture and offshore trading of fish. Antarctic fisheries in 2000 01 reported landing 112,934 metric tons.ref name "cia"refSanta Barbara City College Biological Sciences Retrieved February 5, 2006. ref
Small scale tourism has existed since 1957. As of 2006 several ships transport people into Antarctica for specific scenic locations. A total of 13,571 tourists visited in the 2002 03 antarctic summer with nearly all of them coming from commercial ships. The average stay is about two weeks.ref name "cia"refref Retrieved February 5, 2006. ref Antarctic flights brought tourists from Australia and New Zealand until the fatal crash of Air New Zealand Flight 901 in 1979 near Mount Erebus.
Research
and 25 second exposure allowed sufficient light into this photo taken at Amundsen Scott South Pole Station during the long Antarctic night. The new station can be seen at far left, power plant in the center and the old mechanic's garage in the lower right.
Each year, scientists from 27 different nations conduct experiments not reproducible in any other place in the world but the Antarctic. In the summer more than 4,000 scientists operate research stations this number decreases to nearly 1,000 in the winter.ref name "cia" The McMurdo Station is capable of housing more than a thousand scientists, visitors, and tourists.
Researchers include biologists, geologists, oceanographers, physicists, astronomers, glaciologists, and meteorologists. Geologists tend to study plate tectonics in the Arctic region, meteorites from the outer space, and resources from the breakup of the supercontinent Gondwanaland. Glaciologists in Antarctica are concerned with the study of the history and dynamics of floating ice, seasonal snow, glaciers, and ice sheets. Biologists, in addition to examining the wildlife, are interested in how harsh temperatures and the presence of people affect adaptation and survival strategies in a wide variety of organisms. Astrophysicists in Amundsen Scott South Pole Station are able to study the celestial dome and cosmic microwave background radiation because of the ozone hole and the location's dry, cold environment. Medical physicians have made discoveries concerning the spreading of viruses and the body's response to extreme seasonal temperatures.refAntarctic Connection Retrieved February 4, 2006. ref
Since the 1970s an important focus of study has been the ozone layer in the atmosphere above Antarctica. In 1998 NASA satellite data showed that the Antarctic ozone hole was the largest on record, covering 27million square kilometers. In 2002 significant areas of ice shelves disintegrated in response to regional warming.ref name "cia"
, from Mars.
Meteorites from Antarctica are a relatively recent resource for study of the material formed early in the solar system most are thought to come from asteroids, but some may have originated on larger planets. The first meteorites in Antarctica were found in 1912. In 1969 the Japanese discovered nine meteorites in Antarctica. Most of these meteorites have fallen onto the ice sheet in the last one million years. Motion of the ice sheet tends to concentrate the meteorites at blocking locations such as mountain ranges, with wind erosion bringing them to the surface after centuries beneath accumulated snowfall. Compared with meteorites collected in more temperate regions on Earth, the Antarctic meteorites are relatively well preserved.ref name "meteorite"NASA Retrieved February 9, 2006. ref
This large collection of meteorites allows a better understanding of the abundance of meteorite types in the solar system and how meteorites relate to asteroids and comets. New types of meteorites and rare meteorites have been found. Among these meteorites are pieces blasted off the moon, and probably Mars, by impacts. These specimens, specifically ALH84001 discovered by ANSMET, are at the center of the controversy about possible evidence of microbial life on early Mars. Because meteorites in space absorb and record cosmic radiation, the time elapsed since the meteorite hit the Earth can be determined from laboratory studies. The elapsed time since fall, or terrestrial residence age, of a meteorite represents more information that might be useful in environmental studies of Antarctic ice sheets.ref name "meteorite"
See also
List of antarctic and sub antarctic islands
Antarctica ecozone
Antarctic Stamps
Antarctic Treaty System
Argentine Antarctic Geopolitics
Brazil Antarctic Geopolitics
Chile Antarctic Geopolitics
Communications in Antarctica
Extreme points of Antarctica
Flags of Antarctica
''Life in the Freezer'', a BBC natural history television series on life on and around Antarctica
Transportation in Antarctica
Footnotes
div style "font size:90 "references div
External links
radio station in Antarctica
, official homepage.
from the Library of Congress
from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency
Category:Antarctica
Category:Continents
Category:Lists of coordinates
Category:Special territories
an:Antartida
ar:
ast:Ant rtida
ba:
be:
bg:
bn:
bs:Antarktik
ca:Ant rtida
cs:Antarktida
cy:Antarctica
da:Antarktis
de:Antarktis
el:
eo:Antarkto
es:Ant rtida
eu:Antartika
fa:
fi:Etel manner
fo:Antarktis
fr:Antarctique
ga:Antartaice
gl:Ant rtida
gu:
he:
hr:Antarktika
hu:Antarktisz
ia:Antarctica
id:Antartika
io:Antarktika
is:Su urskautslandi
it:Antartide
ja:
ko:
li:Antarctica
lt:Antarktida
lv:Antarkt da
mr:
ms:Antartika
nds:Antarktis
nl:Antarctica
nn:Antarktis
no:Antarktika
pl:Antarktyda
pt:Ant rtica
ro:Antarctica
ru:
scn:Antartidi
se:Ant rktis
simple:Antarctica
sl:Antarktika
sr:
sv:Antarktis
ta:
th:
tl:Antartika
tr:Antarktika
uk:
vi:Ch u Nam C c
wa:Antartike
yi:
zh:
zh min nan:L m ke k t i lio k
REDIRECT Algorithm
REDIRECT Antigua and Barbuda
Infobox Country
native name Rep blica Argentina
common name Argentina
image flag Flag of Argentina.svg
image coat Argentina coa.png
image map LocationArgentina.png
national motto ''En Uni n y Libertad''br(English: In Union and Liberty)
national anthem ''Himno Nacional Argentino''
official languages Spanish
capital Buenos Aires
latd 34 latm 20 latNS S longd 58 longm 30 longEW W
largest city Buenos Aires
government type Democratic Federal Republic
leader titles President
leader names N stor Kirchner
area rank 8th
area magnitude 1 E12
area 2,791,810
areami 1,077,924 ! Do not remove
percent water 1.1
population estimate 39,538,000
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 31st
population census 36,260,130
population census year 2001
population density 13
population densitymi 33.7 ! Do not remove
population density rank 165th
GDP PPP year 2005
GDP PPP US 537.2 billion
GDP PPP rank 22nd
GDP PPP per capita US 14,087
GDP PPP per capita rank 52nd
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.863
HDI rank 34th
HDI category font color " 009900"high font
sovereignty type Independence
established events May Revolutionbr Declaredbr Recognised
established dates from Spainbr25 May 1810br9 July 1816brin 1821 (by Portugal)
currency Peso
currency code ARS
time zone ART
utc offset 3
time zone DST ARST
utc offset DST 3
cctld .ar
calling code 54
footnotes sup sup Argentina also claims 1,000,000 km of Antarctica, the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. For a total of 3,761,274 sq.km (1,452,236sqmi).
The '''Argentine Republic''' (Spanish: ''Rep blica Argentina'', IPA ) is a country in South America, situated between the Andes in the west and the southern Atlantic Ocean in the east and south. It is bordered by Paraguay and Bolivia in the north, Brazil and Uruguay in the northeast, and Chile in the west and south. It also claims the British overseas territories of the Falkland Islands (Spanish: ''Islas Malvinas'') and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Under the name of Argentine Antarctica, it claims around 1,000,000 square kilometres (386,000sq.mi) of Antarctica, overlapping other claims by Chile and the United Kingdom. By area, it is the second largest country of South America after Brazil and the 8th largest country in the world.
The country is formally named ''Rep blica Argentina'' (Argentine Republic), while for purposes of legislation the form ''Naci n Argentina'' (Argentine Nation) is used.
Origin and history of the name
The name '''Argentina''' derives from the Latin ''argentum'' (silver). The first Spanish conquistadors called the River Plate the R o de la Plata ("River of Silver"). Indigenous people gave silver gifts to the survivors of the shipwrecked expedition, who were led by Juan D az de Sol s. The legend of Sierra del Plata a mountain rich in silver reached Spain around 1524. The name Argentina was first used in Ruy D az de Guzm n's 1612 book ''Historia del descubrimiento, poblaci n, y conquista del R o de la Plata'' (History of the discovery, population, and conquest of the R o de la Plata), naming the territory ''Tierra Argentina'' (Land of Silver).
History
The area of present Argentina was sparsely populated until it was colonised by Europeans. The native people known as Diaguita lived in northwestern Argentina on the edge of the expanding Inca Empire the Guaran lived farther east.
Europeans arrived in 1502. Spain established a permanent colony on the site of Buenos Aires in 1580, and the Viceroyalty of the R o de la Plata in 1776. Independence from Spain was declared on July 9 1816. Centralist and federationist groups were in conflict, until national unity was established and the constitution promulgated in 1853.
Foreign investment and immigration from Europe aided the introduction of modern agricultural techniques and integration of Argentina into the world economy in the late 19th century. In the 1880s the "Conquest of the Desert" subdued or exterminated the remaining native tribes throughout Patagonia.
From 1880 to 1930 Argentina became one of the ten wealthiest nations. Conservative forces dominated Argentine politics until 1916, when their traditional rivals, the Radicals, won control of the government. The military forced Hip lito Yrigoyen from power in 1930 leading to another decade of Conservative rule.
Political change led to the presidency of Juan Per n in 1946, who aimed at empowering the working class and greatly expanded the number of unionised workers. The Revoluci n Libertadora of 1955 deposed him.
In the 1950s and 1960s, military and civilian administrations traded power. When military governments failed to revive the economy and suppress escalating terrorism in the late 1960s and early 1970s, the way was open for Per n's return to the presidency in 1973, with his third wife, Mar a Estela Isabel Mart nez de Per n, as Vice President. During this period, extremists on the left and right carried out terrorist acts with a frequency that threatened public order.
Per n died in 1974. His wife succeeded him in office, but a military coup removed her from office in 1976, and the armed forces formally exercised power through a junta in charge of the self appointed National Reorganisation Process, until 1983. The armed forces repressed opposition using harsh illegal measures (the "Dirty War") thousands of dissidents were "disappeared", while the SIDE cooperated with the CIA, DINA and other South American intelligence agencies in Operation Condor. Many of the military leaders that took part in the Dirty War were trained in the U.S. financed School of the Americas. Among them Argentine dictators Leopoldo Galtieri and Roberto Viola.
Economic problems, charges of corruption, public revulsion in the face of human rights abuses and, finally, the country's 1982 defeat in the Falklands War discredited the Argentine military regime.
Democracy was restored in 1983. Ra l Alfons n's Radical government took steps intending to account for the "disappeared", establishing civilian control of the armed forces and consolidating democratic institutions. Failure to resolve endemic economic problems and an inability to maintain public confidence caused his early departure.
President Carlos Menem imposed peso dollar fixed exchange rate in 1991 to stop hyperinflation, and adopted far reaching market based policies, dismantling protectionist barriers and business regulations, and implementing a privatisation program. These reforms contributed to significant increases in investment and growth with stable prices through most of the 1990s.
The Menem and de la R a administrations faced diminished competitiveness of exports, massive imports which damaged national industry and reduced employment, chronic fiscal and trade deficits, and the contagion of several economic crises. The Asian financial crisis in 1998 precipitated an outflow of capital that mushroomed into a recession, which led to a total freezing of the bank accounts (the ''corralito''), and culminated in a financial panic in November 2001. The next month, amidst bloody riots, President de la R a resigned.
Several new presidents followed in quick succession. Argentina defaulted on its international debt obligations. The peso's almost 12 year old link with the dollar was abandoned, resulting in massive currency depreciation and inflation, in turn triggering a spike in unemployment and poverty. In 2003, N stor Kirchner became the president, and started implementing new policies based on re industrialisation, import substitution, increased exports, consistent fiscal surplus, and high exchange rate.
Politics
The Argentine constitution of 1853, as revised in 1994, mandates a separation of powers into executive, legislative, and judicial branches at the national and provincial level. The president and vice president are directly elected to 4 year terms. Both are limited to two consecutive terms they are allowed to stand for a third term or more after an interval of at least one term. The president appoints cabinet ministers, and the constitution grants him considerable power as both head of state and head of government, including authority to enact laws by presidential decree under conditions of "urgency and necessity" and the line item veto.
Argentina's parliament is the bicameral National Congress or ''Congreso de la Naci n'', consisting of a Senate (''Senado'') of 72 seats and a Chamber of Deputies (''C mara de Diputados'') of 257 members. Since 2001, senators have been directly elected, with each province, including the Federal Capital, represented by three senators. Senators serve 6 year terms. One third of the Senate stands for reelection every 2 years via a partial majority system in each district. Members of the Chamber of Deputies are directly elected to 4 year term via a system of proportional representation. Voters elect half the members of the lower house every 2 years.
Foreign relations
Argentina is currently prompting the Mercosur as its first external priority, contrasting with the 1990s' emphasis in the relationship with the United States.
Administrative divisions
Argentina is divided into 23 provinces (''provincias'' singular: ''provincia''), and 1 autonomous city (commonly known as ''capital federal''), marked with an asterisk:
Buenos Aires (City)sup sup
Buenos Aires (Province)
Catamarca
Chaco
Chubut
C rdoba
Corrientes
Entre R os
Formosa
Jujuy
La Pampa
La Rioja
ol start 13
li Mendoza
li Misiones
li Neuqu n
li R o Negro
li Salta
li San Juan
li San Luis
li Santa Cruz
li Santa Fe
li Santiago del Estero
li Tierra del Fuego, Ant rtida e Islas del Atl ntico Sur
li Tucum n
ol
sup sup The current official name for the federal district is "Ciudad Aut noma de Buenos Aires".
Buenos Aires has been the capital of Argentina since its unification, but there have been projects to move the administrative centre elsewhere. During the presidency of Ra l Alfons n a law was passed ordering the move of the federal capital to Viedma, a city in the Patagonic province of R o Negro. Studies were underway when hyperinflation, in 1989, killed off the project. Though the law was never formally repealed, it has become a mere historical relic, and the project has been forgotten.
Urbanization
About 2.7 million people live in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, and roughly 11.5 million in Greater Buenos Aires (2001), making it one of the largest urban conglomerates in the world. Together with their respective metropolitan areas, the second and third largest cities in Argentina, C rdoba and Rosario, comprise about 1.3 and 1.1 million inhabitants, respectively.
Most European immigrants to Argentina (coming in great waves especially around the World War I and II) settled in the cities, which offered jobs, education, and other opportunities that enabled newcomers to enter the middle class. Since the 1930s many rural workers have moved to the big cities.
The 1990s saw many rural towns become ghost towns when train services were abandoned and local products manufactured on a small scale were replaced by massive amounts of imported cheap goods, in part because of the monetary policy which kept the U.S. dollar exchange rate fixed and low. Many slums (''villas miseria'') sprouted in the outskirts of the largest cities, inhabited by empoverished low class urban dwellers and migrants from smaller towns in the interior of the country. However, it is important to note that the majority of the people that live in these newly formed small shanty towns are people that came from neighboring countries during the time of convertibility and never left. This immigration of humble people from a low socioeconomic status represented an undesirable change because shanty towns and homeless people begging for money was something Argentines didn't know until the economic disaster of the 1990s. However, the government works actively to try to include these new inmigrants into Argentine society and considers their children born in Argentina to be Argentines. There are no plans to build any type of wall to keep these inmigrants out. Argentina adheres to a policy of allowing anybody who wants to come to Argentina to come freely without restrictive inmigration measures. In this respect Argentina is more progressive than many fully developed countries.
! to be filled in with middle class home data
Argentina's urban areas have a European look, reflecting the influence of their European settlers. Many towns and cities are built like Spanish cities around a main square called a plaza. A cathedral and important government buildings often face the plaza. The general layout of the cities is called a ''damero'', that is, a checkerboard, since it is based on a pattern of square blocks, though modern developments sometimes depart from it (for example, the city of La Plata, built at the end of the 19th century, is organised as a checkerboard plus diagonal avenues at fixed intervals).
In descending order by number of inhabitants, the major cities in Argentina are Buenos Aires, C rdoba, Rosario, Mendoza, La Plata, Tucum n, Mar del Plata, Salta, Santa Fe, and Bah a Blanca.
Geography
Argentina can roughly be divided into three parts: the fertile plains of the Pampas in the central part of the country, the centre of Argentina's agricultural wealth the flat to rolling plateau of Patagonia in the southern half down to Tierra del Fuego and the rugged Andes mountain range along the western border with Chile, with the highest point being the Cerro Aconcagua at 6,960 metres (22,834 ft).
Major rivers include the Paraguay, Bermejo, Colorado, Uruguay and the largest river, the Paran . The latter two flow together before meeting the Atlantic Ocean, forming the estuary of the R o de la Plata. The Argentine climate is predominantly temperate with extremes ranging from subtropical in the north to arid sub Antarctic in far south.
Enclaves and exclaves
There is one Argentine exclave: the island of Mart n Garc a (co ordinates ). It is situated near the confluence of the Paran and Uruguay rivers, a mere kilometre (0.62mi) inside Uruguayan waters, about 3.5 kilometres (2.1 mi) from the Uruguayan coastline, near the small city of Mart n Chico (itself about halfway between Nueva Palmira and Colonia del Sacramento).
An agreement reached by Argentina and Uruguay in 1973 reaffirmed Argentine jurisdiction over the island, ending a century old dispute between the two countries. According to the terms of the agreement, Mart n Garc a is to be devoted exclusively to a natural preserve. Its area is about 2 square kilometres (500acres), and the population about 200 people.
Economy
Argentina benefits from rich natural resources, a highly literate population, an export oriented agricultural sector, and a diversified industrial base. The country historically had a large middle class, compared to other Latin American countries, but this segment of the population was decimated by a succession of economic crises. Today, while a significant segment of the population is still financially well off, they stay in sharp contrast with millions who live in poverty or on the brink of it.
Since the late 1970s the country piled up public debt and was plagued by bouts of high inflation. In 1991, the government pegged the peso to the U. S. dollar and limited the growth in the monetary base. The government then embarked on a path of trade liberalisation, deregulation, and privatisation. Inflation dropped and GDP grew, but external economic shocks and failures of the system diluted its benefits, causing it to crumble in slow motion, from 1995 and up to the collapse in 2001.
By 2002 Argentina had defaulted on its debt, its GDP had shrunk, unemployment was over 25 , the peso had devalued 75 after being floated, and inflation was hitting again. However, careful spending control and heavy taxes on now soaring exports gave the state the tools to regain resources and conduct monetary policy.
In 2003, import substitution policies and soaring exports, coupled with a lower inflation and expansive economic measures, triggered a surge in the GDP, which was repeated in 2004, creating jobs and encouraging internal consumption. Capital flight decreased, and foreign investment slowly returned. The influx of foreign currency from exports created such a huge trade surplus that the Central Bank was forced to buy dollars from the market, which it continues to do at the time, to be accumulated as reserves.
The situation in 2005 is much improved, but there are still large numbers of unemployed people that beg for some money or food, especially in the outskirts of Buenos Aires. Some of them are homeless, and there is at least one small non profit humanitarian organisation which distributes free food to some of them most days of the week. However, the country is still the most developed country in Latin America. It boasts the highest GDP per capita, the highest levels of education measured by university attendance, and a reasonable infrastructure that in many aspects is equal in quality to that found in fully industrialized nations. In 2002 over 57 of the population was below the poverty line, at the end of 2005 it was 34 . In 2002 unemployement had reached over 25 , and now it is 10 . GDP per capita has surpassed the previous pre recession peek of 1998. It is a very interesting time in Argentina because the experts agree that if the country makes the right decisions it could develop and reclaim its previosly held position in the first world. So far things are looking good the economy grew 8.8 in 2003, 9.0 in 2004, and 9.1 in 2005. The floor is set so that the economy will grow between 6.0 and 7.5 in 2006 and the government is paying down the foreign debt foreign debt now stands at 69 of GDP and is slowly decreasing. The Argentine economy has so much untapped potential that if the country manages to encourage the proper level of investment the country could experience growth rates of 9.0 for this year and years to come.
Demographics
Unlike most of its neighbouring countries, Argentina's population descends overwhelmingly from Europeans. The basic demographic stock (97 of the population) is made up of descendants of Spanish, Italian, German and other European settlers.
Waves of immigrants from European countries arrived in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Patagonian Chubut Valley has a significant Welsh descended population and retains many aspects of Welsh culture. Other important immigrant groups came from Germany (German colonies were settled in the provinces of Entre R os, Misiones, Formosa, C rdoba and the Patagonian region, as well as in Buenos Aires itself), France (mostly settled in Buenos Aires city and province), Scandinavia (especially Sweden), the United Kingdom and Ireland (Buenos Aires and Patagonia), and Eastern European nations, such as Poland, Russia, Ukraine and the Balkans region (especially Croatia and Serbia) and others. The overwhelming majority of Argentina's Jewish community, numbering about 395,379 , also derives from immigrants of Northern and Eastern European origin Ashkenazi Jews. It is the largest Jewish community in Latin America and fifth largest in the world.
Middle Eastern immigrants number about 500,000, mainly in urban areas.
Small numbers of people from Far East Asia have also settled Argentina, mainly in Buenos Aires. The first Asian Argentines were of Japanese descent, but Koreans, Vietnamese, and Chinese soon followed. There are also smaller numbers of people from the Indian subcontinent.
Culture
Argentine culture has been primarily informed and influenced by its European roots. Buenos Aires is undeniably the most European city in South America, due both to the prevalence of people of Italian, Spanish and German descent and to conscious imitation.
Argentine cinema has achieved international recognition with films such as "The Official Story" and "Nine Queens", though it has only rarely been taken into account by mainstream popular viewers who prefer Hollywood type movies. Even low budget productions, however, have obtained prizes in cinema festivals (such as Cannes). The city of Mar del Plata organizes its own festival dedicated to this art.
The best known element of Argentine culture is probably their music and dance, particularly tango. In modern Argentina, tango music is enjoyed in its own right, especially since the radical Astor Piazzolla redefined the music of Carlos Gardel. It must be noted that while tango refers mostly to a particular dancing music for foreigners, the music together with the lyrics (often sung in a kind of slang called lunfardo) are what most Argentines primarily mean by tango. Tango lyrics can be considered a kind of poetry.
Since the 1970s rock and roll is also widely appreciated in Argentina. First during the 1970s and then again at the mid 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, national rock and roll and pop music experienced bursts of popularity, with many new bands (such as Soda Stereo and Sumo) and composers (like Charly Garc a and Fito P ez) becoming important referents of national culture.
Buenos Aires is also considered the techno electronica country in Latin America, that started with little raves, and nowadays is home of important events such as Creamfields (which has the world record of 65,000 people), South American Music Conference and many more.
European classical music is well considered in Argentina, with the Col n Theater one of the best opera houses in the world. Musicians such as Martha Argerich and composers like Lalo Schifrin have become internationally famous.
See also the articles on the cuisine, the music, and the football (Spanish: ''F tbol'') of Argentina. For a prevalent custom among Argentines, see mate. For the traditional Buenos Aires dance, see tango.
Language
The only official language is Spanish, although some immigrants and indigenous communities have retained their original languages in specific points of the country. There are, for example many Welsh speaking towns in Patagonia and German speaking cities in C rdoba, Buenos Aires and cities in the Patagonia. Italian and French is also widely spoken.
Argentina is the largest Spanish speaking community in the world that employs ''voseo'' (the use of the pronoun ''vos'' instead of ''t '', associated with some alternate verb conjugations). The most prevalent dialect is Rioplatense, with most speakers located in the basin of the R o de la Plata.
Religion
Argentina is an overwhelmingly Christian country. The majority of Argentina's population (80 ) is at least nominally Roman Catholic. Roman Catholicism is supported by the state, as stipulated in the Constitution. Evangelical churches gained a place in Argentina especially since the 1980s and now number more than 3.5 million or 10 . Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints (Mormons) number over 330,300, the seventh largest concentration in the world. Traditional Protestant communities are also present.
The country also hosts the largest Jewish population in Latin America, about 395,379 strong. It is also home to one of the largest mosques in Latin America, serving Argentina's small Muslim community.
See also
! section with alphabetical order
Argentine Antarctica
Communications in Argentina
Education in Argentina
Elections in Argentina
Foreign relations of Argentina
Governors in Argentina
Military of Argentina
National parks of Argentina
Public holidays in Argentina
Tourism in Argentina
Transportation in Argentina
References
! section with alphabetical order
External links
div style "font size: 90 "
Government
Official government website
Official presidential website
Official senatorial website
Official lower house website
Directories
Search engine of Argentine only websites
News
(Official news agency)
(See article)
(See article)
(See article)
(San Juan)
(See article)
(Mendoza)
(Mendoza)
(Paran )
(Salta)
(Buenos Aires)
(C rdoba)
(Tucum n)
(See article)
(Buenos Aires)
(Bah a Blanca)
(See article)
(Mar del Plata)
(Tres Arroyos)
Images
Travel
Official tourism website
Other
div
Argentina
af:Argentini
ar:
an:Archentina
ast:Arxentina
bg:
zh min nan:Argentina
be:
bn:
bs:Argentina
ca:Argentina
cs:Argentina
cy:Ariannin
da:Argentina
de:Argentinien
et:Argentina
el:
es:Argentina
eo:Argentino
eu:Argentina
fr:Argentine
gd:Argentina
gl:Arxentina Argentina
ko:
ht:Ajantin
hi:
hr:Argentina
io:Arjentinia
id:Argentina
ia:Argentina
is:Argent na
it:Argentina
he:
hy:
ka:
kw:Arghantina
ku:Arjant n
la:Argentina
lv:Argent na
lt:Argentina
lb:Argentinien
li:Argentini
hu:Argent na
mk:
ms:Argentina
nah:Arxentina
na:Argentina
nl:Argentini
nds:Argentinien
ja:
no:Argentina
nn:Argentina
oc:Argentina
pl:Argentyna
pt:Argentina
ro:Argentina
qu:Arxintina
ru:
sa:
sq:Argjentina
simple:Argentina
sk:Argent na
sl:Argentina
sr:
fi:Argentiina
sv:Argentina
tl:Arhentina
ta:
th:
vi:Argentina
tr:Arjantin
uk:
yi:
zh:
fiu vro:Argentina
! BEGIN INFOBOX
Infobox Country
native name br Hayastani Hanrapetutyunbr Republic of Armenia
common name Armenia
image flag Flag of Armenia.svg
image coat Coa Armenia.jpg
national motto ''none''
image map LocationArmenia.png
national anthem ''Mer Hayrenik''
official languages Armenian
capital Yerevan latd 40 latm 16 latNS N longd 44 longm 34 longEW E
government type Republic
leader titles Presidentbr Prime Minister
leader names Robert Kocharianbr Andranik Markaryan
largest city Yerevan
area 29,800
areami 11,506 ! Do not remove
area rank 139th small1 small
area magnitude 1 E11
percent water 4.7
population estimate 2,982,904
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 133rd
population census 3,288,000
population census year 1989
population density 100
population densitymi 259 ! Do not remove
population density rank 74th
GDP PPP year 2005
GDP PPP 13,650,000,000
GDP PPP rank 130th
GDP PPP per capita 4,600
GDP PPP per capita rank 119th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.759
HDI rank 83rd
HDI category font color " FFCC00"medium font
sovereignty type Independence
established events Declaredbr Established
established dates From the Soviet Unionbr August 23 1990br September 21 1991
currency Dram
currency code AMD
time zone UTC
utc offset 4
time zone DST DST
utc offset DST 5
cctld .am
calling code 374
footnotes small1: Area does not include Nagorno Karabakh. small
! END INFOBOX
The '''Republic of Armenia''', or '''Armenia''' (Armenian: , ''Hayastan'', , ''Hayq''), is a landlocked Eurasian country in the Caucasus region, bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and the Nakhichevan exclave of Azerbaijan to the south. Armenia is a member of the Council of Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States and for centuries has been on the crossroads between the east and west.
Origin of the name
The original Armenian name for the country was ''Hayq'', later ''Hayastan'', translated as ''the land of Haik'', and consisting of the name Haik and the Persian suffix ' stan' (land). According to legend, Haik was a great great grandson of Noah (son of Togarmah, who was a son of Gomer, a son of Noah's son, Japheth), and according to an ancient Armenian tradition, a forefather of all Armenians. He is said to have settled below Mount Ararat, travelled to assist in building the Tower of Babel, and, after his return, defeated the Babylonian king Bel (believed by some researchers to be Nimrod) on August 11, 2492 BC near Lake Van, in the southern part of historic Armenia (presently in Turkey).
Hayq was given the name Armenia by the surrounding states, as it was the name of the strongest tribe living in the historic Armenian lands, who called themselves ''Armens''. It is traditionally derived from ''Armenak'' or ''Aram'' (the great grandson of Haik's great grandson, and another leader who is, according to Armenian tradition, the ancestor of all Armenians). Some Jewish and Christian scholars write that the name 'Armenia' was derived from ''Har Minni'', that is 'Mountains of Minni' (or Mannai). Pre Christian accounts suggest that ''Nairi'', meaning ''land of rivers'', was an ancient name for the country's mountainous region, first used by Assyrians around 1200 BC while the first recorded inscription bearing the name Armenia, namely the Behistun Inscription in Iran, dates from 521 BC.
History
Armenia has been populated by humans since prehistoric times, and has been proposed as the site of the Biblical Garden of Eden.
Armenia was a regional empire with a rich culture in the years leading up to the 1st century, spanning from the shores of the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea and the Mediterranean Sea during the rule of Tigranes the Great.
Armenia's strategic location between two continents has subjected it to invasions by many peoples, including the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Turks and Mongols.
In AD 301, Armenia became the first country in the world to adopt Christianity as its official state religion, twelve years before the Roman Empire granted Christianity official toleration under Galerius, and some 30 40 years before Constantine was baptised. There had been various pagan communities before Christianity, but they were converted by an influx of Christian missionaries.
Having changed between various dynasties including Parthian (Iranian), Roman, Byzantine, Arab, Mongol and Persian occupations Armenia was substantially weakened. In 1500's, the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Persia divided Armenia among themselves.
In 1813 and 1828, present day Armenia (consisting of the Erivan and Karabakh khanates within Persia) was temporarily incorporated into the Russian Empire. After a short lived independent republic established after the Bolshevik Revolution in Petrograd, Armenia was incorporated into the USSR. Between 1922 and 1936 it existed as the Transcaucasian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic (with Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan), and from 1936 to 1991 as the Armenian SSR.
During the final years of the Ottoman Empire (1915 1922), a large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia perished as a result of what is termed the Armenian Genocide, regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western historians to have been state sponsored mass killings. Turkish authorities, however, maintain that the deaths were a result of a civil war coupled with disease and famine, with casualties incurred by both sides. Most estimates for the number of Armenians killed range from 650,000 to 1,500,000, and these events are traditionally commemorated yearly on April 24. Armenians and a handful of other countries worldwide have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for over 30 years, but there are also many countries who are pressured not to officially characterize the Armenian massacres as genocide.
Armenia remained preoccupied by a long conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno Karabakh, a mostly Armenian populated enclave that, Armenians allege, Stalin had placed in Soviet Azerbaijan. A military conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan began in 1988, and the fighting escalated after both countries gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. By May 1994, when a cease fire took hold, ! ethnic WERE THEY ETHNIC OR ARMENIAN REPUBLIC FORCES ! Armenian forces controlled not only Nagorno Karabakh but also the surrounding districts of Azerbaijan proper. The economies of both countries have been hurt in the absence of a peaceful resolution.
Politics
The Government of Armenia's stated aim is to build a Western style parliamentary democracy as the basis of its form of government. However, international observers have questioned the fairness of Armenia's parliamentary and presidential elections and constitutional referenda since 1995, citing polling deficiencies, lack of cooperation by the electoral commission, and poor maintenance of electoral lists and polling places. For the most part however, Armenia is considered one of the more pro democratic nations in the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The unicameral parliament (also called the National Assembly) is controlled by a coalition of three political parties: the conservative Republican party , the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, and the Country of Law party. The main opposition is composed of several smaller parties joined in the Justice Bloc.
Armenians voted overwhelmingly for independence in a September 1991 referendum. Levon Ter Petrossian was president until January 1998, when public demonstrations against his increasingly authoritarian regime and his domestic and foreign policies forced his resignation. In 1999, as the Prime Minister Vazgen Sargsian, parliament Speaker Karen Demirchian, and six other officials were killed in the attack on the National Assembly , the country experienced a period of political instability. President Robert Kocharian was successful in riding out the unrest, and currently rules with the support of the parliamentary coalition.
Administrative Provinces
Armenia is divided into 11 provinces (''marzer'', singular ''marz''):
Aragatsotn ()
Ararat ()
Armavir ()
Gegharkunik ()
Kotayk ()
Lori ()
Shirak ()
Syunik' ()
Tavush ()
Vayots Dzor ()
Yerevan ()
br clear "all"
Geography
Armenia is a landlocked country in the southern Caucasus. Located between the Black and Caspian Seas, Armenia is bordered on the north and east by Georgia and Azerbaijan, and on the south and west by Iran and Turkey. Though geographically in Western Asia, politically and culturally Armenia is closely aligned with Europe. Historically, Armenia has been at the crossroads between Europe and Southwest Asia, and is therefore seen as a transcontinental nation.
The Republic of Armenia, covering an area of 30,000 square kilometres (11,600sq.mi), is located in the north east of the Armenian Highland (covering 400,000 sq km or 154,000sq.mi), otherwise known as historic Armenia and considered as the original homeland of Armenians.
The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers and few forests. The climate is highland continental: hot summers and cold winters. The land rises to 4,095 metres (13,435ft) above sea level at Mount Aragats, and no point is below 400 metres (1,312ft) above sea level. Mount Ararat, regarded by the Armenians as a symbol of their land, is the highest mountain in the region and used to be part of Armenia until around 1915, when it fell to the Turks.
Armenia is trying to address its environmental problems. It has established a Ministry of Nature Protection and introduced taxes for air and water pollution and solid waste disposal, whose revenues are used for environmental protection activities. Armenia is interested in cooperating with other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS, a group of 12 former Soviet republics) and with members of the international community on environmental issues. The Armenian Government is working toward closing its Nuclear Power Plant at Medzamor near Yerevan as soon as alternative energy sources are identified.
Economy
Until independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry based chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and textile and highly dependent on outside resources. Agriculture contributed only 20 of net material product and 10 of employment before the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority of energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant) the main domestic energy source is hydroelectric. Small amounts of coal, gas, and petroleum have not yet been developed.
Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned economy and the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak Earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being felt. The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno Karabakh has not been resolved. The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy, because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials. Land routes through Georgia and Iran are inadequate or unreliable. GDP fell nearly 60 from 1989 until 1992 1993. The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first years after its introduction in 1993.
Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide ranging economic reforms that paid off in dramatically lower inflation and steady growth. The 1994 cease fire in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict has also helped the economy. Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995, building on the turnaround that began the previous year, and inflation has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as precious stone processing and jewelry making, information and communication technology, and even tourism are beginning to supplement more traditional sectors in the economy, such as agriculture.
This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are extending considerable grants and loans. Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed 1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit, stabilizing the currency developing private businesses energy the agriculture, food processing, transportation, and health and education sectors and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone. The government joined the World Trade Organization on February 5, 2003. But one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains the Armenian diaspora, which finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public projects. Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the Western World.
A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a Law on Privatization was adopted in 1997, as well as a program on state property privatization. Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including increasing revenue collection, improving the investment climate, and making strides against corruption.
In the 2006 Index of Economic Freedom, Armenia ranked 27th best, tied with Japan and ahead of countries like Norway, Spain, Portugal and Italy. However, Armenia ranked very low on property rights worse than countries like Botswana, Trinidad and Tobago.
In the 2005 Transparency International Corruption Index Armenia ranked 88, Highly Corrupt.
Demographics
Armenia has a population of 2,982,904 (July 2005 est.) and is the second most densely populated of the former Soviet republics. There has been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break up of the USSR. The rates of emigration and population decline, however, have been decreasing in the recent years, a trend which is expected to continue. In fact Armenia is expected to resume its positive population growth by 2010.
Ethnic Armenians make up 97.9 of the population. Kurds make up 1.3 , and Russians 0.5 . There are smaller communities of Assyrians, Georgians, Greeks and Ukrainians. Most Azerbaijanis, once a sizable population, have left since independence.
Nearly all of the Armenians in Azerbaijan (approximately 120,000) now live in the Nagorno Karabakh region. Armenia has a very large diaspora (8 million by some estimates, greatly exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself), with communities existing across the globe, including France, Lebanon, and North America.
The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. The roots of the Armenian Church go back to the 1st century AD. According to tradition, the Armenian Church was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles Thaddaeus and Bartholomew who preached Christianity in Armenia in the 40's 60's AD. Because of these two founding apostles, the official name of the Armenian Church is Armenian Apostolic Church. Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, in AD 301. Over 93 of Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of Oriental (Non Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syrian churches. Armenia also has a population of Catholics (both Roman and Mekhitarist Armenian Uniate (180,000)), evangelical Protestantsand followers of the Armenian traditional religion. The Yazidi Kurds, who live in the western part of the country, practise Yazidism. The Armenian Catholic Church is headquartered in Bzoummar, Lebanon.
Ethnic Azeris and Kurds who lived in the country before the Karabakh conflict practised Islam, but most Azeris were driven out of Armenia into Azerbaijan between 1988 and 1991 at the beginning of the conflict. During the same period, Armenia also received a large influx of Armenians scattered throughout Azerbaijan and large number of Azeri population migrated to Azerbaijan.
Culture
, Mount Ararat, here seen from Yerevan, is the national symbol of Armenia.
Armenians have their own highly distinctive alphabet and language. 96 of the people in the country speak Armenian, while 75.8 of the population speaks Russian as well. The adult literacy rate in Armenia is 99 . Most adults in Yerevan can communicate in Russian, while English is increasing in popularity.
Caucasian hospitality is legendary and stems from ancient tradition. Social gatherings focused around sumptuous presentations of course after course of elaborately prepared, well seasoned (but not spicy hot) food. The host or hostess will often put morsels on a guest's plate whenever it is empty or fill his or her glass when it gets low. After a helping or two it is acceptable to refuse politely or, more simply, just leave a little uneaten food.
The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that date back to the Middle Ages. It houses paintings by many European masters. The Modern Art Museum, the Children s Picture Gallery, and the Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy collections of fine art on display in Yerevan. Moreover, many private galleries are in operation, with many more opening each year. They feature rotating exhibitions and sales.
The world class Armenian Philharmonic Orchestra performs at the beautifully refurbished city Opera House, where you can also attend a full season of opera. In addition, several chamber ensembles are highly regarded for their musicianship, including the National Chamber Orchestra of Armenia and the Serenade Orchestra. Classical music can also be heard at one of several smaller venues, including the State Music Conservatory and the Chamber Orchestra Hall. Jazz is popular, especially in the summer when live performances are a regular occurrence at one of the city s many outdoor cafes.
Yerevan s Vernisage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square, bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts, many of superb workmanship, on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid week). The market offers woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus specialty. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted into an amazing assortment of jewelry and ornamental objects. Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long and distinguished tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of recent Russian manufacture nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so on, are also available at the Vernisage.
Across from the Opera House, a popular art market fills another city park on the weekends. Armenia s long history as a crossroads of the ancient world has resulted in a landscape with innumerable fascinating archaeological sites to explore. Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age and even Stone Age sites are all within a few hours drive from the city. All but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original settings.
The American University of Armenia has graduate programs in Business and Law, among others. The institution owes its existence to the combined efforts of the Government of Armenia, the Armenian General Benevolent Union, USAID, and the Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California, Berkeley.
The extension programs and the library at AUA form a new focal point for English language intellectual life in the city. Many of the country s most successful young entrepreneurs are graduates of this institution.
See also
Artsakh
Armenian people
Armenian Genocide
First Republic of Armenia
Castles of Armenia
Hayastani Azgayin Scautakan Sharjum Kazmakerputiun the Armenian National Scout Movement
Nagorno Karabakh
Public holidays in Armenia
Music of Armenia
Armenian needlelace
List of Armenians
Khachkars intricate Armenian knotwork crosses
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Armenia
Foreign relations of Armenia
Military of Armenia
Transportation in Armenia
External links and references
the Armenian Wiki with thousands of articles
Armenian literature and history
publishes the index of economic freedom
The World Factbook Armenia
Government of Armenia
Library of Congress Portal on Armenia
Armenia information
Armenian News and pictures of Churches and Ararat Mountain
General information (Armenian, English, Polish)
Portals
Armenian portal with millions of visitors (Armenian,Russian,English)
Armenian web ring
Armenian Search Engine and Directory
News sites
Armenia Armenian News
Fastest News from Armenia
Armenian News Network Groong
, edited by John Hughes
Weekly online publishing articles and reports about Armenia and South Caucasus. Available in English and French
af:Armeni
ar:
an:Armenia
ast:Armenia
az:Erm nistan
bg:
zh min nan:Hayastan
be:
bn:
bs:Armenija
ca:Arm nia
cs:Arm nie
cy:Armenia
da:Armenien
de:Armenien
et:Armeenia
el:
es:Armenia
eo:Armenio
fa:
fr:Arm nie
fy:Armeenje
gl:Armenia
ko:
hy:
hi:
hr:Armenija
io:Armenia
id:Armenia
ia:Armenia
is:Armen a
it:Armenia
he:
ka:
kk:
ku:Ermenistan
la:Armenia
lv:Arm nija
lt:Arm nija
li:Armeni
hu: rm nyorsz g
ms:Armenia
mo:
na:Armenia
nl:Armeni
nds:Armenien
ja:
no:Armenia
nn:Armenia
pl:Armenia
pt:Arm nia
ro:Armenia
ru:
sa:
sq:Armenia
sh:Jermenija
simple:Armenia
sk:Arm nsko
sl:Armenija
sr:
fi:Armenia
sv:Armenien
tl:Armenia
th:
tr:Ermenistan
uk:
ur:
zh:
:''For the region in northwest Iran, see Iranian Azerbaijan''
Infobox Country
native name Az rbaycan Respublikas brRepublic of Azerbaijan
common name Azerbaijan
national motto none
national anthem Az rbaycan Respublikas n n D vl t Himni
image flag Flag of Azerbaijan.svg
image coat Azericoat.gif
image map LocationAzerbaijan.png
capital Baku latd 40 latm 22 latNS N longd 49 longm 53 longEW E
largest city Baku
official languages Azerbaijani
government type Representative democracy
leader titles PresidentbrPrime Minister
leader names Ilham AliyevbrArtur Rasizade
sovereignty type Independence
established events Declaredbr Formerly
established dates From the Soviet UnionbrAugust 30, 1991br Azerbaijan SSR
area 86,600
areami 33,436 ! Do not remove WP:MOSNUM
area rank 112th
area magnitude 1 E9
percent water negligible
population estimate 7,911,974
population estimate year 2005
population estimate rank 91st
population census N A
population census year 2000
population density 90
population densitymi 233 ! Do not remove WP:MOSNUM
population density rank 81st
GDP PPP year 2004
GDP PPP 37,841,000,000
GDP PPP rank 87th
GDP PPP per capita 4,500
GDP PPP per capita rank 112th
HDI year 2003
HDI 0.729
HDI rank 101st
HDI category font color " FFCC00"medium font
currency Manat
currency code AZN
time zone
utc offset 4
time zone DST
utc offset DST 5
cctld .az
calling code 994
footnotes
The '''Republic of Azerbaijan''' (Azerbaijani: Az rbaycan or Az rbaycan Respublikas ) is a country in the Caucasus, at the crossroads of Europe and Southwest Asia, with a coast on the Caspian Sea. It has frontiers with Russia in the north, Georgia in the northwest, Armenia in the west, and Iran in the south. The Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic (an exclave of Azerbaijan) borders Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and west, and Turkey to the northwest.
Azerbaijan is a secular state, and has been a member of the Council of Europe since 2001. A majority of the population are Shi'a Muslim and of Western Turkic descent, known as Azerbaijanis, or simply Azeris. The country is formally an emerging democracy, however with strong authoritarian rule.
Etymology
There are several hypotheses regarding the origins of the name "Azerbaijan." The most common theory is that it is derived from "Atropatan." Atropat was the satrap at the time of the Persian Achaemenid dynasty, and gained independence after Alexander the Great destroyed the Achaemenids. The region was known as ''Media Atropatia'' or ''Atropatene'' at the time.
There are also alternative opinions that the term is a slight Turkification of ''Azarbaijan'', in turn an Arabicized version of the original Persian name '' zar b dag n'', made up of '' zar badag n'' ('' zar'' fire '' b dag'' cultivated area '' n'' suffix of pluralization) that it traditionally means "the land of eternal flames" or "the land of fire", which is probabely implies Zoroastrian fire temples in this land. Some Azeri historians contend that the name is made up of four Azerbaijani components: ''az er bay can'', which means "the land of the brave Az people" or "an elevated place for the wealthy and exalted." ! please name some of these Azeri historians who so contend
Historically, a large part of the territory of the present day Azerbaijan Republic has been called Arran, named after Arran, a legendary founder of Caucasian Albania. However, the precise location identified by this name has shifted somewhat over time, currently referring to the lowland Karabakh plains situated between the Kura and Araks rivers.
Some opponents of the name ''Azerbaijan'' assert that it is anachronistic to use it in a historical context before 1918, because, they say, the term was first introduced by the national intelligentsia in early 20th century and later was endorsed by the Bolsheviks, with intention of claiming the northern province of Persia. To substantiate this claim they state that until the early 20th century the population of present day Azerbaijan had no clear ethnic identification and referred to themselves primarily as "Muslims."
History
''Main article: History of Azerbaijan''
The earliest known inhabitants of what is today Azerbaijan were the Caucasian Albanians, a Caucasian speaking people who appear to have been in the region prior to the host of peoples who would eventually invade the Caucasus. Historically Azerbaijan has been occupied by a variety of peoples, including Armenians, Persians, Romans, Arabs, Turks, Mongols, Greek Empire, and Russians.
The first state to emerge in the territory of present day Republic of Azerbaijan was Mannae in the 9th century BC, lasting until 616 BC when it was overthrown by the Medes. The satrapies of Atropatene and Caucasian Albania were established in the 4th century BC and included the approximate territories of present day Azerbaijan and southern parts of Dagestan.
Islam spread rapidly in Azerbaijan following the Arab conquests in the 7th8th centuries. After the power of the Arab Khalifate waned, several semi independent states have been formed, the Shirvanshah kingdom being one of them. In the 11th century, the conquering Seljuk Turks became the dominant force in Azerbaijan and laid the ethnic foundation of contemporary Azerbaijanis or Azeri Turks. In the 1314th centuries, the country experienced Mongol Tatar invasions.
Azerbaijan was part of the Safavid state in 15th18th centuries. It also underwent a brief period of feudal fragmentation in the mid 18th to early 19th centuries, and consisted of independent khanates. Following the two wars between the Qajar dynasty of Persia and the Russian Empire, Azerbaijan was acquired by Russia through the Treaty of Gulistan in 1813, and the Treaty of Turkmenchay in 1828.
After the collapse of the Russian Empire during World War I, Azerbaijan declared independence and established the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. This first Muslim republic in the world lasted only two years, from 1918 to 1920, before the Soviet Red Army invaded Azerbaijan. Subsequently, Azerbaijan became part of the Soviet Union.
Azerbaijan re established its independence upon the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. Despite a cease fire in place since 1994, Azerbaijan has yet to resolve its conflict with Armenia over the predominantly ethnic Armenian Nagorno Karabakh region. Azerbaijan has lost control of 16 of its territory including Karabakh, and must support some 800,000 refugees and internally displaced persons as a result of the conflict.
Politics
''Main article: Politics of Azerbaijan''
, President of Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan is a presidential republic. The head of state and head of government are separate from the country s law making body. The people elect the president for a five year term of office. The president appoints all cabinet level government administrators. A fifty member national assembly makes the country s laws. The people of Azerbaijan elect the National Assembly. Azerbaijan has universal suffrage above the age of eighteen.
After the presidential elections of October 15, 2003, an official release of the Central Election Committee (CEC) gave Isa Gambar leader of the largest opposition bloc, Bizim Azerbaycan ("Our Azerbaijan") 14 percent of the electorate and the second place in election. Third, with 3.6 , came Lala Shevket Hajiyeva, leader of the National Unity Movement, the first woman to run in presidential election in Azerbaijan. Nevertheless, the OSCE, the Council of Europe, Human Rights Watch and other international organizations, as well as local independent political and NGOs voiced concern about observed vote rigging and a badly flawed counting process.
Several independent local and international organizations that had been observing and monitoring the election directly or indirectly declared Isa Gambar winner in the 15 October election. Another view shared by many international organisations is that in reality a second tour of voting should have taken place between the two opposition candidates Isa Gambar and Lala Shevket.
Human Rights Watch commented on these elections: "Human Rights Watch research found that the government has heavily intervened in the campaigning process in favor of Prime Minister Ilham Aliev, son of current President Heidar Aliev. The government has stacked the Central Election Commission and local election commission with its supporters, and banned local non governmental organizations from monitoring the vote. As the elections draw nearer, government officials have openly sided with the campaign of Ilham Aliev, constantly obstructing opposition rallies and attempting to limit public participation in opposition events. In some cases, local officials have closed all the roads into town during opposition rallies, or have extended working and school hours on one occasion, even declaring Sunday a workday to prevent participation in opposition rallies." (source: )
OSCE s final report (source: or )
Azerbaijan held parliamentary elections on Sunday, 6 November 2005.
Subdivisions
''Main article: Subdivisions of Azerbaijan''
Azerbaijan is divided into:
59 raions (rayonlar rayon singular),
11 cities ( h rl r h r singular),
1 autonomous republic (muxtar respublika), which itself is divided into:
7 raions
1 city
Geography
''Main article: Geography of Azerbaijan''
Azerbaijan has an arid climate, except in the southeast. Temperatures vary by season. In the southeast lowland, temperatures average 6 C (43 F) in the winter and 26 C (80 F) in the summer though daily maxima typically reach 32 C (89 F). In the northern and western mountain ranges, temperatures average 12 C (55 F) in the summer and 9 C (20 F) in the winter.
Annual rainfall over most of the country varies from 200 to 400 millimetres (8 to 16in) and is generally lowest in the northeast. In the far southeast, however, the climate is much moister and annual rainfall can be as high as 1300 millimetres (51 in). For most of the country, the wettest periods are in spring and autumn, with summers being the driest.
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Azerbaijan''
The economy is largely based on industry. Industries include machine manufacture, petroleum and other mining, petroleum refining, textile production, and chemical processing. Agriculture accounts for one third of Azerbaijan s economy. Most of the nation s farms are irrigated. In the lowlands, farmers grow such crops as cotton, fruit, grain, tea, tobacco, and many types of vegetables. Silkworms are raised for the production of natural silk for the clothing industry. Azerbaijan s herders raise cattle, domestic sheep and goats near the mountain ranges. Seafood and fish are caught in the nearby Caspian Sea. Azerbaijan has a highly dynamic economy, mainly because of oil, and has a GDP growth rate of up to 11 a year.
Demographics
''Main article: Demographics of Azerbaijan''
Azerbaijan has population of roughly 7,911,974 (July 2005 est.), 90.6 of whom are ethnic Azerbaijani (also called Azeris 1999 census figures). Azeris also form about 24 of the population of Iran, predominating in the northern regions of the country. Most of Armenia s Azeri minority have left since independence and the Nagorno Karabakh war. The second largest ethnic group are Russians, who now form roughly 1.8 of the population, most having emigrated since independence.
The Talysh, an Iranian people, predominate in the southernmost regions of the country around the Talysh mountains and across the border into Iran. Some people argue that the number of Talysh is greater than officially recorded, as many of them are counted as Azerbaijanis.
Numerous 'Dagestani' peoples live around the border with Dagestan. The main peoples are the Lezgis, Avar and the Tsakhur. Smaller groups include the Budukh, Udi, Kryts and Khinalug Ketsh around the village of Xinaliq. Around the town of Quba in the north live the Tats, also known as the Mountain Jews, who are also to be found in Dagestan. Many Tats have emigrated to Israel in recent years, though this trend has slowed and even reversed more recently.
The country s large Armenian population mostly fled to Armenia and to other countries with the beginning of the Armenian Azeri conflict over Nagorno Karabakh. During the same period, Azerbaijan also received a large influx of Azerbaijanis fleeing Armenia and later Nagorno Karabakh and adjacent provinces occupied by the Armenians. Almost all of Azerbaijan s Armenians now live in Nagorno Karabakh.
Azerbaijan also contains numerous smaller groups, such as Kurds, Georgians, Tatars and Ukrainians.
Most Azerbaijanis (about 60 70 ) are Twelver Shia Muslim. Other religions or beliefs that are followed by many in the country are the orthodox Sunni Islam, the Armenian Apostolic Church (in Karabakh), the Russian Orthodox Church, and various other Christian and Muslim sects. The Tat in Quba, as well as several thousand Ashkenazim Jews in Baku, follow Judaism. Adherence to religious dogmas is nominal for the majority of the population and attitudes are secular. Traditionally, villages around Baku and the Lenkoran region are considered stronghold of Shi ism, and in some northern regions populated by Sunni Dagestani people, the Salafi sect has gained a following. Folk Islam is widely practiced, but an organized Sufi movement is absent.
Culture
''Main article: Culture of Azerbaijan''
The official language of Azerbaijan is Azerbaijani, a member of the Oguz subdivision of the Turkic language family, and is spoken by around 95 of the republic s population, as well as about a third of the population of Iran. Its closest relatives in language are Turkish and Turkmen. As a result of the language policy of the Soviet Union, Russian is also commonly spoken as a second language among the urbane. There are also speakers of Persian and Kurdish in the state. Azerbaijan s culture has long cultural roots with Iran and Iranian peoples.
Music of Azerbaijan
Islam in Azerbaijan
Azerbaijani literature
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Azerbaijan
Transportation in Azerbaijan
Military of Azerbaijan
Foreign relations of Azerbaijan
Public holidays in Azerbaijan
List of Azerbaijanis
Scout Association of Azerbaijan
Nagorno Karabakh
References
Forrest, Brett (Nov. 28, 2005). "Over a Barrel in Baku". ''Fortune'', pp. 5460.
External links
directory category
directory category
world's largest website about Azerbaijan
: Weekly online magazine publishing articles and reports about Azerbaijan and South Caucasus. Available in English and French.
with a
ar:
an:Azerbay n
ast:Azerbaiy n
az:Az rbaycan
bg:
zh min nan:Azerbaijan
be:
bn:
bs:Azerbejd an
ca:Azerbaidjan
cs: zerb jd n
cy:Azerbaijan
da:Aserbajdsjan
de:Aserbaidschan
et:Aserbaid aan
el:
es:Azerbaiy n
eo:Azerbaj ano
eu:Azerbaijan
fa:
fr:Azerba djan
fy:Azerbeidzjan
gl:Acerbaix n Az rbaycan
ko:
hi:
hr:Azerbejd an
io:Azerbaijan
id:Azerbaijan
is:Aserba dsjan
it:Azerbaijan
he: '
ka:
kk:
ku:Azerbeycan
lv:Azerbaid na
lt:Azerbaid anas
lb:Aserbaidschan
li:Azerbaidzjan
hu:Azerbajdzs n
ms:Azerbaijan
na:Azerbaijan
nl:Azerbeidzjan
nds:Aserbaidschan
ja:
no:Aserbajdsjan
nn:Aserbajdsjan
os:
pl:Azerbejd an
pt:Azerbaij o
ro:Azerbaidjan
ru:
sa:
sq:Azerbajxhani
simple:Azerbaijan
sk:Azerbajd an
sl:Azerbajd an
sr:
fi:Azerbaid an
sv:Azerbajdzjan
tl:Azerbaijan
tt: z rbaycan
th:
tr:Azerbaycan
uk:
ur:
zh:
'''Amateur astronomy''', often called '''back yard astronomy''' in the US, is a hobby whose participants enjoy observing celestial objects. It is usually associated with viewing the night sky when most celestial objects and events are visible, but sometimes amateur astronomers also operate during the day for events such as sunspots and solar eclipses.
Amateur astronomers often look at the sky using nothing more than their eyes, but common tools for amateur astronomy include portable telescopes and binoculars.
Amateur astronomy and scientific research
Unlike professional astronomy, scientific research is not always the ''main'' goal for many amateur astronomers. Work of scientific merit is certainly possible, however, and many amateurs contribute to the knowledge base of professional astronomers very successfully. Astronomy is often promoted as one of the few remaining sciences for which amateurs can still contribute useful data.
The majority of scientific contributions by amateur astronomers are in the area of data collection. In particular, this applies where large numbers of amateur astronomers with small telescopes are more effective than the relatively small number of large telescopes that are available to professional astronomers. Several organisations, such as the Center for Backyard Astrophysics , exist to help coordinate these contributions.
In particular, amateur astronomers often contribute toward activities such as monitoring the changes in brightness of variable stars, helping to track asteroids, and observing occultations to determine both the shape of asteroids and the shape of the terrain on the apparent edge of the Moon as seen from Earth.
In the past and present, amateur astronomers have also played a major role in discovering new comets. Recently however, funding of projects such as the Lincoln Near Earth Asteroid Research and Near Earth Asteroid Tracking projects has meant that ''most'' comets are now discovered by automated systems, long before it is possible for amateurs to see them.
A newer role for amateurs is searching for overlooked phenomena (e.g. Kreutz Sungrazers) in the vast libraries of digital images and other data captured by Earth and space based observatories, much of which is available over the Internet.
Societies for amateur astronomy
There are a large number of amateur astronomical societies around the world that serve as a meeting point for those interested in amateur astronomy, whether they be people who are actively interested in observing or "armchair astronomers" who may be simply interested in the topic. Societies range widely in their goals, depending on a variety of factors such as geographic spread, local circumstances, size and membership. For instance, a local society in the middle of a large city may have regular meetings with speakers, focusing less on observing the night sky if the membership is less able to observe due to factors such as light pollution.
It is common for local societies to hold regular meetings, which may include activities such as star parties. Other activities could include amateur telescope making, which was pioneered in America by Russell W. Porter, who later played a major role in design and construction of the Hale Telescope.
Approaches to using amateur telescopes
Amateur telescopes come in many shapes and sizes, both commercial and home built. The preferences of people who use them often differ.
Star hopping
Some amateur astronomers prefer to learn the sky as accurately as they can, using maps to find their way between the stars. In this case a common approach is to use binoculars or a manually driven telescope, combined with star maps, to locate items of interest in the sky. The normal technique for doing this, by locating landmark stars and "hopping" between them, is called star hopping.
GOTO telescopes
More recently as technology has improved and prices have come down, automated "GOTO" telescopes have also become a popular choice. With these computer driven telescopes, the user typically enters the name of the item they wish to look at, and the telescope finds it in the sky automatically with comparatively little further effort required by the user.
The main advantage of a "GOTO" telescope for an experienced amateur astronomer is the reduction of "wasted" time that may have otherwise been used in trying to find a particular object. This time can therefore be used more effectively for ''studying'' the object.
Comparing methodologies
There is significant (though usually light hearted) debate within the hobby about which method is better. Promoters of the star hopping approach for finding items in the sky usually argue that they know the sky much better as a result. The manual method also tends to require simpler equipment with less calibration and setup time, and is therefore more versatile. Promoters of "GOTO" telescopes often argue that they are more interested in studying objects, and the reward of finding them or learning exactly where they are is not as important to them.
It may also be argued that the money spent on complex electronics and mounting systems might be better spent on higher quality optics.
Additional tools and activities
In addition to optical equipment, amateur astronomers use a variety of other tools such as celestial maps, and specialised computer software. There is a range of astronomy software available, from planetarium programs that simulate the sky to programs used to do various kinds of calculations pertaining to astronomical phenomena.
Most amateur astronomers also keep a record of their observations. This can take the form of an observing log, in which they record details about which objects were observed and describing the details that were seen. Astrophotography and sketching are also popularly used to record observations.
Beginning in amateur astronomy
There are a many ways for people to become involved in amateur astronomy and study the night sky. One option is to join a local astronomical society, the members of which will often be very happy to help a newcomer take a more active part. Some people also prefer to simply teach themselves, in which case there are likely to be a large amount of books in the local library.
Common objects that are observed early are the Moon and planets. Another thing that most newcomers to amateur astronomy become acquainted with are the more prominent constellations in the night sky. When reading maps and interpreting instructions for future star hopping, constellations are good starting points for identifying locations in the night sky. They are frequently referred to by amateur astronomers when discussing the location of items of interest when looked at with binoculars and telescopes.
Beginning with a GOTO telescope
A relatively new ''type'' of beginning amateur astronomer, brought about by the increased affordability of powerful "GOTO" telescopes, is one who begins with such a telescope. It is possible for an inexperienced person to immediately look at a large amount of deep sky objects in the night sky without necessarily having any prior experience or training.
There is currently some debate among amateur astronomers about the merits of this approach to becoming involved in the hobby, and the effects that low priced GOTO telescopes may be having. Amateur astronomy is exposed to more people, as an individual is less likely to be discouraged by the need to learn how to locate objects in the night sky before being able to see them. Some are concerned, however, that newcomers may become bored very quickly. A GOTO telescope does not distinguish between objects that are easy and hard to see, and newcomers may therefore begin with objects that require large amounts of experience or understanding to properly appreciate.
Becoming acquainted with the night sky
Most tutors agree that it is very important to know one's way around the sky by means of the constellations. This ability forms a platform from which deeper explorations of the sky are then possible.
A planisphere can be used to find and identify the constellations. These devises show the location of the constellations for any time of the night or time of the year. An observer will also need a red flashlight to read star charts or the planisphere. Use of a red light helps preserve the dark adaptation of the eyes.
Having learned the main constellations, a beginner may want to extend their hobby and buy a pair of binoculars or a telescope.
Using binoculars
With binoculars it is possible to see many deep sky objects (DSOs). Holding the binoculars can produce a shaky image. One way to improve the view is with the aid of a sturdy tripod mount to steady the view through the binoculars. Binoculars are still limited in range, although most of the Messier catalogue should be visible, as well as a great many NGC's, especially near the Milky Way. An advantage of binoculars is that they allow more complete wide field views of the larger open clusters such as the Pleiades, the Hyades, the Coma Berenices cluster and Praesepe, for example, of which only portions are usually observable in one field of view at higher magnifications.
Using a telescope
With a telescope, the sky really comes alive, especially one that has an aperture of six inches or more. Some amateur telescopes are built by their owners from scratch, but many good quality telescopes can be purchased from reputable companies. Thousands of DSOs are visible in a telescope and the determined amateur with a large (about 41 cm) telescope can push this to tens of thousands or more.
Another type of telescope to consider, especially if the amateur is observing with children, is a wide field telescope, such as Edmund Scientific's f 4 Astroscan compact reflector. This type of telescope is typically a short tube reflector and has an aperture of only 80 to 120 mm (3 1 4 to 4 3 4 inches), but is easier to target an object, since it offers a much wider field of view. With the aid of high power lenses (i.e. eyepieces), the amateur can zoom in on planets and some of the closer DSOs. It is the best of a blend of a telescope's narrow long range light gathering ability with a binocular's wider field of view.
Those who are particularly interested in observing the moon and planets may prefer a high power design such as the Maksutov telescope.
With any telescope, though, the mount is the most important feature. A tripod that doesn't shake every time one uses it is a must. Too many amateur astronomers give up because they have a hard time targeting an object. If the mounting tripod is rock solid, the amateur can enjoy their time observing the heavens instead of fighting with the telescope.
Astrophotography
camera with a 50 mm lens and 400 ISO film. The exposure was taken for 10 seconds on a tripod using a shutter cable release.
The next step in an amateur astronomer's quest for more space adventure could be the purchase of a good camera for Astrophotography. Starting out with a good 35 mm camera with a 50 mm lens mounted on a tripod and using a cable release and 400 or faster speed film, the amateur can capture some nice pictures of the planets and some larger nebula, like the Orion Nebula. Some of the larger comets and prolific meteor showers can be photographed this way as well.
As one progresses, cameras can be mounted directly on to telescopes, capturing on film many DSOs. Special films and even the technique of hypering the film has been employed by the amateur. Many publications accept these astrophotos in their magazines, i.e., ''Astronomy'' and ''Sky Telescope''.
A more recent development is the use of webcams to do speckle imaging (also known as ''video astronomy''). The resulting short exposure frames can be stacked using the shift and add method of speckle imaging or selected to do lucky imaging, all using commercially available astronomy software.
Sketching
As an alternative to photography in order to make a record of observations, amateurs also use sketching. Sketching does not require the use of any specialized equipment and is therefore suitable for beginners as well as advanced amateur observers. There are different approaches to sketching that require different tools, simple pencil sketches can sometimes be used to make accurate renditions of what the observer sees through binoculars or a telescope. As the expewrience of the observer increases, more advanced drawing tools and techniques can be employed.
Sketching has the advantage of helping the observer scrutinize the object that is seen and can help bring out details that otherwise might have been overlooked.
Suggested reading
Some good books for amateur astronomers to start with are:
''The Stars: A New Way to See Them'', by Hans Augusto Rey, ISBN 0 395 081211
''NightWatch: An Equinox Guide to Viewing the Universe'', by Terence Dickinson, ISBN 0 920 656897
''The Backyard Astronomer's Guide'', by Terence Dickinson and Alan Dyer, ISBN 0 921 820119
''Turn Left at Orion'', by Guy Consolmagno, ISBN 0 521 34090 X
''Skywatching'', by David H. Levy and John O'Byrne, ISBN 0 707 8354751 X
''Seeing in the Dark: How Backyard Stargazers Are Probing Deep Space and Guarding Earth from Interplanetary Peril'', by Timothy Ferris, ISBN 0 684 865793
''The Complete Manual Of Amateur Astronomy'', by P. Clay Sherrod
''Burnham's Celestial Handbook: An Observer's Guide to the Universe Beyond the Solar System'' (3 vols.), by Robert Burnham, Jr., (Vol 1) ISBN 048623567X, (Vol 2) ISBN 0486235688, (Vol 3) ISBN 0486236730
See also
Amateur telescope making
Astronomical object
Astronomy
Observation
Observational astronomy
Skygazing
External links
information for newcomers to the hobby
the UK's biggest society for amateur astronomers
amateur astrophotography, reviews and articles
de:Amateurastronomie
es:Astronom a amateur
fr:Observation du ciel
it:Astronomia amatoriale
hu:Amat rcsillag sz
fi:T htitieteen harrastus
th:
zh:
REDIRECT Astronomer
border "1" cellpadding "2" width "300" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0" style "float:right clear:right "
! colspan "2" bgcolor " FFCCCC" Aikido
! colspan "2" Japanese Name
width "150" Kanji
width "150"
width "150" Hiragana
width "150"
colspan "2" 300px
'''Aikido''' ( ''Aikid '', also using an older style of kanji), literally meaning 'joining energy way', is a gendai budo a modern Japanese martial art. Practitioners of Aikido are known as '''aikidoka'''. It was developed by Morihei Ueshiba ( ) (also known by Aikidoka as o sensei ( ) over the period of the 1930s to the 1960s. Technically, the major parts of Aikido are derived from Dait ry Aiki j jutsu ( ), a form of Jujutsu with many joint techniques, and kenjutsu ( ), or Japanese sword technique (some believe the tactics in Aikido are especially influenced by Yagy Shinkage ry ). Aikido is also considered to contain a significant spiritual component.
History
The name aikido is formed of three Japanese characters, , usually romanised as ai, ki and do. These are often translated as meaning union, universal energy and way, so aikido can be translated as 'the way to union with universal energy'. Another common interpretation of the characters is harmony, spirit and way, so Aikido can also mean 'the way of spiritual harmony'. Both interpretations draw attention to the fact that aikido's techniques are designed to control an attacker by controlling and redirecting their energy instead of blocking it. An analogy is often made of the way a flexible willow bends with the storm, whereas the stout oak will break if the wind blows too hard. (The Korean martial art commonly known as hapkido uses the same three characters: some suggest a historical link through Daito ryu, the main origin of aikido).
Morihei Ueshiba developed aikido mainly from Daito ryu aikijutsu, incorporating training movements such as those for the ''yari'' (spear), ''jo'' (a short quarterstaff), and perhaps also ''juken'' (bayonet). But arguably the strongest influence is that of the katana (sword). In many ways, an aikido practitioner moves as an empty handed swordsman. The aikido strikes ''shomenuchi'' and ''yokomenuchi'' originated from weapon attacks, and resultant techniques likewise from weapon take aways. Some schools of aikido do no weapons training at all others, such as Iwama Ryu usually spend substantial time with ''bokken'' bokuto (wooden sword), ''jo'', and ''tanto'' (knife). In some lines of aikido, all techniques can be performed with a sword as well as unarmed.
Aikido was first brought to the West in 1951 by Minoru Mochizuki with a visit to France. It was introduced to the United States in 1953 by Kenji Tomiki and, a little later in the same year by Koichi Tohei. The United Kingdom followed in 1955, Germany and Australia in 1965. Today there are many aikido dojos available to train at throughout the world.
Technique
Aikido incorporates a wide range of techniques which use principles of energy and motion to redirect, neutralise and control attackers. One of the central martial philosophies of aikido is to be able to handle multiple attacker circumstances fluidly. ''Randori'', practice against multiple opponents, is a key part of the curriculum in most aikido schools and is required for the higher level belts. Another tenet of aikido is that the aikidoka should gain control of their opponent as quickly as possible, while causing the least amount of damage possible to either party. If performed correctly, size and strength are not important for the techniques to be effective.
Training
The methods of training vary from organisation to organisation, and indeed even between different dojo in a single organisation. Typically, however, a class consists of a teacher demonstrating techniques or principles which the students then practice. Training is done through mutual technique, where the focus is on entering and blending (harmonising) with the attack, rather than on meeting force with force. ''Uke'', the receiver of the technique, usually initiates an attack against ''nage'' (also referred to as ''tori'' or ''shite'' depending on Aikido style), who neutralises it with an aikido technique. The uke and the nage have equally important roles. Uke's role is to be honest and committed in attack, to use positioning to protect oneself, and to learn proper technique through the imbalanced feeling created by nage's technique. Nage's role is to blend with and neutralise uke's attack without leaving an opening to further attacks. Simultaneously nage will be studying how to create a feeling of being centred (on balance) and controlled in the application of the Aikido technique. Therefore, students must practise both positions in order to learn proper technique. When O Sensei taught, all his students were uke until he deemed them knowledgeable enough of the technique to be nage. Movement, awareness, precision, distance and timing are all important to the execution of techniques as students progress from rigidly defined exercises to more fluid and adaptable applications. Eventually, students take part in ''jiyu waza'' (free attack) and or randori, where the attacks are less predictable. Most schools employ training methods wherein uke actively attempts to employ counter techniques, or ''kaeshi waza''.
O Sensei did not allow competition in training because some techniques were considered too dangerous and because he believed that competition did not develop good character in students. Most styles of aikido continue this tradition although Shodokan Aikido (see Styles) started with competitions early on. In the Ki Society there are forms (''taigi'') competitions held from time to time.
Defense
Aikido techniques are largely designed towards keeping the attacker off balance and locking joints. Much of aikido's repertoire of defenses can be performed either as throwing techniques (''nage waza'') or as pins (''katame waza''), depending on the situation. Entering, ''irimi'', and turning, ''tenkan'', are widely used aikido concepts, as is striking, ''atemi''. The use of striking techniques is dependent on the organization and, to some extent, the individual dojo. Some dojo teach the strikes that are integral to all aikido techniques as mere distractions used to make the application of an aikido technique easier, while others teach that strikes are to be used for more destructive reasons. O Sensei himself wrote, while describing the aikido technique ikkyo, "...first smash the eyes." (This might well refer to the fact that the classic opener for ikkyo is a knife hand thrust towards the face, to make uke block and thus expose his or her arm to the joint control thus, ''as though'' moving to smash uke's eyes.) Manipulation of uke's balance by entering is often referred to as "taking uke's center". It is sometimes said that Aikido contains only defense, and the attacks that are performed are not really aikido. From a historical perspective this claim is questionable, but many if not most aikidoka have the defense techniques as the focus of their training.
Attacks
In the early days when Ueshiba began teaching to the public, students tended to be proficient in another martial art. Due to this, attacks per se are generally not focused on in contemporary aikido dojos. Students will learn the various attacks from which an Aikido technique can be practiced. Although attacks seldom are studied to the same extent as some arts, good attacks are needed to study correct and effective application of technique. "Honest" attacks are considered important. An "honest" attack would be an attack with full intention or a strong neutral (neither pulling or pushing) grab or hold. The speed of an attack may vary depending on the experience and level of the "nage" (the partner who executes the throw or technique). Whether the attack is fast or slow, the uke's intention to strike or control (if grabbing or pinning) should remain, in order to provide the nage a realistic training scenario.
Aikido attacks used in normal training include various stylized strikes and grabs such as ''shomenuchi'' (a vertical strike to the head), ''yokomenuchi'' (a lateral strike to the side of the head and or neck), ''munetsuki'' (a straight punch), ''ryotedori'' (a two handed grab) or ''katadori'' (a shoulder grab). Many of the '' uchi'' strikes resemble blows from a sword or other weapon. Kicks are sometimes used, but are not usually part of basic curricula. Most aikido techniques can also be applied to a response to an attack, e.g. to a block, and some schools use this as the "basic" form of a given class of technique. Beginners also tend to work with techniques executed in response to a grab. Grabs are considered good for basic practice because the connection with uke is very clear and strong, and it is easier to "feel out" body mechanics and lines of force.
There is also the matter of ''atemi'', or strikes employed during an aikido technique. The role and importance of atemi is a matter of some debate in aikido. Some view atemi as strikes to "vital points" that can be delivered during the course of a technique's application, to increase effectiveness. Others consider atemi to be methods of distraction, particularly when aimed at the face. For instance, if a movement would expose the aikido practitioner to a counter blow, he or she may deliver a quick strike to distract the attacker or occupy the threatening limb. (Such a strike will also usually break the target's concentration, making them easier to throw than if they are able to focus on resisting.) Atemi can be interpreted as not only punches or kicks but also, for instance, striking with a shoulder or a large part of the arm. Some throws are arguably effected through an unbalancing or abrupt application of atemi. are attributed to Morihei Ueshiba, although their precise content varies considerably based on the one doing the telling.
Weapons
Weapons training in aikido usually consists of jo (4 foot staff), bokken (wooden sword), and wooden (or sometimes rubber) tanto (knife). Both weapons taking and weapons retention are sometimes taught, to integrate the armed and unarmed aspects of aikido. For example, a technique done with a straight punch may be done with a tanto or jo thrust instead, or a grab technique may be illustrated as a way to draw strike with a weapon while being grabbed.
Many schools use versions of Morihiro Saito's weapons system: aiki jo and aiki ken. The system contains solo kata with jo, and paired exercises for both jo and bokken. Some lineages use bokken kata derived from older sword schools. Also, quite a few aikido teachers, such as Mitsugi Saotome and Kazuo Chiba, have developed their own weapons systems. This is largely due to the fact that O'Sensei did not teach weapons to his students, excepting a few.
Clothing
The aikidogi used in Aikido is similar to the keikogi used in most other modern budo arts simple trousers and a wraparound jacket, usually white. In some places a keikogi of karate cut is preferred, in others most people use judo keikogis. Keikogi made specially for aikido exist, but usually not in the lower price ranges. Many dojos insist that the sleeves are cut short to elbow length, to reduce the risk of trapped fingers and injuries in grab techniques to the wrist.
To the keikogi adds the traditional garment hakama, wide pleated trousers. The hakama is usually black or dark blue and in most dojos, the hakama is reserved for practitioners with dan (black belt) ranks. Systems also exist where hakama is never worn or are worn from a specific kyu rank others exist where women are allowed to wear it earlier than men.
The belt, ''obi'' is wrapped twice around the body similar to in karate or judo. Although some systems use many belt colours similar to the system in judo, the most common version is that dan ranks wear black belt, and kyu ranks white sometimes with an additional brown belt for the highest kyu ranks. In some dojos it is common to have the same color belt at different levels.
Spirituality
The ending "do" in the word aikido indicates a spiritual path, unlike the ending "jutsu" in the word aikijujutsu, which indicates a system of techniques. Many people see this difference as important as well as regarding iaijutsu and iaido, jujutsu and judo, and kenjutsu and kendo. Others see this distinction as a historically incorrect and somewhat unnatural division. For example, literally, do refers to a path and jitsu to a technique: therefore, some argue, aikido involves both a way (do) and technical study (jutsu).
Ueshiba taught that, while it was important to become proficient in physical technique, this is not the ultimate purpose of training. He taught that the principles learned through training in physical technique are universal and are to be applied to all aspects of one's life. He once commented that he was teaching students not how to move their feet but, rather, how to move their minds.
Many agree that Ueshiba's style became softer, more fluid, and effortless as he grew older. Some suggest this was due to a shift in focus to the spiritual aspects of the art, while others suggest that this was simply a natural result of Ueshiba becoming more proficient in physical technique. Various interpretations have arisen since Ueshiba's death.
A range of aikido schools can be found, each placing a different emphasis on physical techniques, underlying principles, and spiritual concepts. This is largely a result of at what point the founder of each of these schools trained with Ueshiba earlier or later in Ueshiba's life. The former tend to focus more on physical technique, while the latter tend to focus more on spiritual concepts. However, this should not be overstated, especially since there is considerable variance from sensei to sensei, and an "aikido continuum" is quite problematic to actually construct. Some aikidoka view "physical vs. spiritual" as a false separation, or a failed attempt to stereotype branches of aikido.
Ki Society is an example of a school that focuses heavily on the spiritual concepts of aikido, rather than physical technique.
Ki
The Japanese character for ki, is a symbolic representation of a lid covering a pot full of rice. The steam being contained within, is ki. This same word is applied to the ability to harness one's own 'breath power', 'power', or 'energy'. This 'ki' is the same as the 'qi' in qi gong, but many people argue it is not the same as the 'chi' in t'ai chi. When aikidoka say that someone is training with a lot of ki, they usually want to express that the person is very non forcefully compelling in the execution of his technique. Timing, a sense for the correct distance and a centered (undisturbed) mind and body are particularly important. Most teachers claim to locate ki in the hara, which might be loosely defined as the body's center of gravity, situated in the lower abdomen, about two inches below and behind the navel. In training it is constantly emphasized that one should keep one's hara that is, remain ''centered''. Very high ranking teachers sometimes reach a level of coordination that enables them to execute techniques with very little apparent movement, sometimes even without seeming to touch their opponent's body.
Essentially, ki corresponds to the physical concepts of center of gravity, center of momentum, and center of force. However, these centers are not necessarily the same, so ki also encompasses the biological and mental aspect of training oneself to have exquisite control over motion.
The "spiritual" interpretation of ki depends very much on what school of aikido one studies, as some emphasize it more than others. Ki Society dojos, for example, tend to spend much more time on ki related training activities than do, for example, Yoshinkan dojos. The importance of ki in aikido cannot be denied the name of the martial art, after all, can be translated as "the meeting of ki". But what ki is, is debated by many within the discipline. O Sensei himself appears to have changed his views over time for example, Yoshinkan Aikido, which largely follows O Sensei's teachings from before the war, is considerably more martial in nature, reflecting a younger, more violent and less spiritual O Sensei. Within this school, ki perhaps could be better thought of as having its original Chinese meaning of breath, and aikido as coordination of movement with breath to maximize power. As O Sensei evolved and his views changed, his teachings took on a much more ethereal feel, and many of his later students (almost all now high ranking senseis within the Aikikai) teach about ki from this perspective.
See also: Qi, Qigong
Body
Aikido training is for all around physical fitness, flexibility, and relaxation. The human body in general can exert power in two ways: contractive and expansive (aikidofaq.com). Many fitness activities, for example weight lifting, emphasize the former, which means that specific muscles or muscle groups are isolated and worked to improve tone, mass, and power. The disadvantage of this, however, is that whole body movement and coordination are rarely stressed. Thus, while muscle size and power may increase, there is no emphasis on the ways in which those muscles can work together most efficiently. Also, this sort of training tends to increase tension, decrease flexibility, and stress the joints. The result may be aesthetically pleasing, but when done to excess may actually be detrimental to overall health.
The second type of power, expansive, is mostly stressed in activities such as dance or gymnastics. In these activities, the body must learn to move in a coordinated manner and with relaxation. Aikido also mostly stresses this sort of training. While both types of power are important, it is interesting to note that a person who masters the second type of power can, in a martial context, often overcome a person who is much bigger or stronger. The reason for this is that the contractive power is only as great as the mass and power of your individual muscles. Expansive power, however, as used in Aikido, can be much greater than your size may lead you to believe. This is because you move with your whole body. Rather than stressing and tensing only a few muscles, you learn to relax and move from the center of your body, where you are most powerful. Power is then extended out naturally through the relaxed limbs, which become almost whip like in their motion. Needless to say, the power behind an entire person's body will be more than that of someone's arm or leg alone.
Hence, aikido develops the body in a unique manner. Aerobic fitness is obtained through vigorous training. Flexibility of the joints and connective tissues is developed through various stretching exercises and through the techniques themselves. Relaxation is learned automatically, since without it the techniques will not function. A balanced use of contractive and expansive power is mastered, enabling even a small person to pit his entire body's energy against their opponent.
With this, different masters stress different aspects of training. Some masters stress importance of body posture while executing the technique in order to coordinate different parts of the body, while others deal with the physical aspects of it. With each way, comes a different means of interpretation of the same basic principles of the art which is discussed in more detail above.
Mind
Aikido training does not consider the body and mind as independent entities. The condition of one affects the other. For example, the physical relaxation learned in aikido also becomes a mental relaxation. Likewise, the confidence that develops mentally is manifested in a more confident style. Psychological or spiritual insight learned during training must become reflected in the body, else it will vanish under pressure, when more basic, ingrained patterns and reflexes take over. Aikido training requires the student to squarely face conflict, not to run away from it. Through this experience, an Aikido student may learn to face other areas of life in a similarly proactive fashion, rather than in with avoidance and fear.
Styles
The major styles of aikido each have their own Hombu Dojo in Japan, have an international breadth and were founded by direct students of Morihei Ueshiba. Although there has been an explosion of "independent styles" generally only the first five listed have been considered major. Iwama Ryu is a debatable sixth as, although its influence is major, it has until recently been part of the Aikikai (see below).
! Please see Talk concerning Styles and External Links. Entries should not act as a list of individual or dojo clusters. The length of such a list would be very long. If you disagree please discuss in Talk.
Aikikai is the largest aikido organisation, and is led by the family of the founder. Numerous sub organisations and teachers affiliate themselves with this umbrella organisation, which therefore encompasses a wide variety of aikido styles, training methods and technical differences. These sub organisations are often centred around prominant Shihan and are usually organised at the national level, although sub national and inter national sub organisations exist. Please see List of famous aikidoka for more detail.
Yoshinkan Founded by Gozo Shioda, has a reputation for being the most rigidly precise. Students of Yoshinkan aikido practise basic movements as solo kata, and this style has been popular among the Japanese police. The international organization associated with the Yoshinkan style of aikido is known as the Yoshinkai, and has active branches in many parts of the world.
Yoseikan was founded by Minoru Mochizuki, who was an early student of O Sensei and also of Jigoro Kano at the Kodokan. This style includes elements of aiki budo together with aspects of karate, judo and other arts. It is now carried on by his son, Hiroo Mochizuki, the creator of Yoseikan Budo.
Shodokan Aikido (often called Tomiki aikido, after its founder) use sparring and rule based competition in training as opposed to most others. People tend to compete to train rather than to train to compete. Kenji Tomiki, an early student of O Sensei and also of judo's Jigoro Kano, believed that introducing an element of competition would serve to sharpen and focus the practice since it was no longer tested in real combat. This latter view was the cause of a split with O Sensei's family who firmly believed that there was no place for competition in aikido training. Tomiki said that at no point did O Sensei actually cast him out.
The Ki Society, founded by former head instructor of the Hombu dojo 10th dan Koichi Tohei, emphasizes very soft flowing techniques and has a special program for the development of ki. It also has a special system of ki ranks alongside the traditional kyu and dan system. This style is called Shin Shin Toitsu Aikido (or Ki Aikido).
Iwama Ryu emphasizes the relation between weapon techniques and barehand techniques, and a great deal of emphasis is placed on weapons training. Since the death of its founder Morihiro Saito, the Iwama style has been practiced by clubs within the Aikikai and an independent organization headed by Hitohiro Saito. Saito sensei was a long time uchideshi of O Sensei, beginning in 1946 and staying with him through his death. Many consider that Saito sensei was the student who spent most time directly studying with O Sensei. Saito sensei said he was trying to preserve and teach the art exactly as the founder of aikido taught it to him. Technically, Iwama ryu seems to resemble the aikido O Sensei was teaching in the early 50s mainly in the Iwama dojo. The technical repertoire is fairly large. The new, separate from Aikikai, Iwama Ryu Aikido has been renamed Iwama Shin Shin Aikishurenkai.
Shin'ei Taido Founded by the late Noriaki Inoue, nephew of Morihei Ueshiba.
Yoshokai aikido, begun by then hachidan Takashi Kushida of Yoshinkan aikido, is a remarkably centralized style of aikido, with test techniques yearly passed down with explanations from the home dojo. The syllabus contains a considerable amount of weapons study, and like Yoshinkan, Yoshokai includes many solo movements and exercises.
Doshinkan aikido, begun by Yukio Utada of Yoshinkan aikido. Utada was a student of both the Yoshinkan founder Gozo Shioda and Yoshokai founder Takashi Kushida. Like Yoshokai, the syllabus also contains a considerable amount of weapons study, and like Yoshinkan, Doshinkan includes many solo movements and exercises. Doshinkan Aikido (Aikido Association of North America and Doshinkan Aikido International) is still affiliated with the International Yoshinkan Aikido Federation.
Tendoryu Aikido Headed by Kenji Shimizu.
Shin Budo Kai headed by Shizuo Imaizumi.
Kokikai aikido, founded by Shuji Maruyama in 1986, focuses on minimalist but effective technique. It emphasizes natural stances and ukemi that do not require high breakfalls, and deemphasizes atemi and techniques that cause pain or undue discomfort to uke. As such, it is considered by some to be a "soft" style of aikido.
Seidokan Aikido, founded by Rod Kobayashi. Tends to utilize movements which are very small and economical. Encourages students to discover an aikido which is truly their own, stresses the importance of doing away with the extraneous and focusing on that which works
Nippon Kan Headed by Gaku Homma.
Nishio AIkido a part of the Aikikai although techically well defined according to its head Shoji Nishio. Nishio Sensei passed away in March 2005.
Nihon Goshin Aikido Headed by Richard Bowe. It is considered a "hard" style of aikido, combining techniques from karate, Judo and Daito Ryu Aikijutsu. There are roughly a dozen dojos in the United States and none left in Japan. Founded by Shoto Morita in Japan circa 1950. Derivative styles include Nihon Goshin Aikijutsu founded by Walter Kopitov in 2000. For more information see "The Black Belt Master Course in Nihon Goshin Aikido".
Takemusu Aiki Tomita Academy. Academy for the development of Takemusu Aiki founded in 1992 by Takeji Tomita. This training method incorporates Tai Jutsu, Aiki Ken and Aiki Jo for the study of the inter related principles of Takemusu Aiki and Japanese Budo.
Aiki Manseido Headed by Kanshu Sunadomari. Independent style centred in Kyushu, Japan.
! Please see Talk concerning Styles and External Links. Entries should not act as a list of individual or dojo clusters. The length of such a list would be very long. If you disagree please discuss in Talk.
Aikidoka
It is sometimes said that in Japan the term ''aikidoka'' ( ) mainly refers to a professional while in the west, any one who practices may call themselves an aikidoka. The term ''aikidoist'' is also used as a more general term, especially by those who prefer to maintain the more restricted, Japanese, meaning of the term aikidoka.
:''See List of famous aikidoka''
External links
! Please see Talk concerning Styles and External Links. Entries should not act as a list of individual or dojo clusters. The length of such a list would be very long. If you disagree please discuss in Talk.
is a comprehensive site on aikido, with essays, , , , , , and other information. Chief among its notable content is its .
A large but loose collection of essays, multimedia, and humour
the most comprehensive source of aikido historical information
! Please see Talk concerning Styles and External Links. Entries should not act as a list of individual or dojo clusters. The length of such a list would be very long. If you disagree please discuss in Talk.
Category:Japanese martial arts
ar:
bg:
ca:Aikido
cs:Aikido
da:Aikido
de:Aikid
es:Aikido
eo:Aikido
fr:A kido
gl:Aikido
hr:Aikido
id:Aikido
it:Aikid
he:
lt:Aikido
hu:Aikido
ms:Aikido
nl:Aikido
ja:
no:Aikido
pl:Aikido
pt:Aikido
ro:Aikido
ru:
sk:Aikido
sl:Aikido
sr:
fi:Aikido
sv:Aikido
exihibited in the Louvre.
By its original and broadest definition, '''''art''''' (from the Latin ''ars'', meaning "skill" or "craft") is the product or process of the effective application of a body of knowledge and a set of skills this meaning is preserved in such phrases as "liberal arts" and "martial arts". However, in the modern use of the word, which rose to prominence during the Renaissance, ''art'' is commonly understood to be the process or result of making material works (or '''artwork''') which, from concept to creation, adhere to the "creative impulse"that is, art is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by necessity, by biological drive, or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation. By both definitions of the word, artistic works have existed for almost as long as humankind, from early pre historic art to contemporary art.
The '''creative arts''' are a collection of disciplines whose principal purpose is in the output of material that is compelled by a personal drive and echoes or reflects a message, mood, and symbolism for the viewer to interpret. As such, the term ''art'' may be taken to include forms as diverse as prose writing, poetry, dance, acting, music, sculpture and painting. In addition to serving as a method of pure creativity and self expression, the purpose of works of art may be to communicate ideas, such as in politically , religiously , and philosophically motivated art, to create a sense of beauty (see ''aesthetics'' and ''fine art'') or pleasure, or to generate strong emotions the purpose may also be seemingly nonexistent.
As a form of cultural expression, art may be defined by the pursuit of diversity and the usage of narratives of liberation and exploration (i.e. art history, art criticism, and art theory) to mediate its boundaries. This distinction may be applied to objects or performances, current or historical, and its prestige extends to those who made, found, exhibit, or own them. Other than originality, there are no widely agreed upon criteria for what is or isn't considered "art", and there are many divergent definitions of ''art'' to seek more specific requirements.
Etymology
The word ''art'' derives from the Latin ''ars'', which roughly translates to "skill" or "craft", and derives in turn from an Indo European root meaning "arrangement" or "to arrange". This is the only near universal definition of art: that whatever is described as such has undergone a deliberate process of arrangement by an agent. A few examples where this meaning proves very broad include artifact, artificial, artifice, artillery, medical arts, and military arts. However, there are many other colloquial uses of the word, all with some relation to its etymological roots.
Art forms
There are a variety of arts, including visual arts and design, decorative arts, plastic arts, and the performing arts. Artistic expression takes many forms: painting, drawing, printmaking, sculpture, music, literature, and architecture are the most widely recognised forms. However, since the advent of modernism and the technological revolution, new forms have emerged. These include photography, film, video art, installation art, conceptual art, performance art, community arts, land art, fashion, comics, computer art, anime, and, most recently, video games.
Within each form, a wide range of genres may exist. For instance, a painting may be a still life, a portrait, or a landscape and may deal with historical or domestic subjects. In addition, a work of art may be representational or abstract.
Most forms of art fit under two main categories: fine arts and applied arts, though there is no clear dividing line. In the visual arts, the term ''fine arts'' most often refers to painting and sculpture, arts which have little or no practical function and are valued in terms of the visual pleasure they provide or their success in communicating ideas or feelings. Other visual arts typically designated as fine arts include printmaking, drawing, photography, film, and video, though the tools used to realize these media are often used to make applied or commercial art as well. Architecture typically confounds the distinctions between fine and applied art, since the form involves designing structures that strive to be both attractive and functional. The term ''applied arts'' is most often used to describe the design or decoration of functional objects to make them visually pleasing. Artists who create applied arts or crafts are usually referred to as designers, artisans, or craftspeople.
Defining art
There is often confusion about the meaning of the term ''art'' because multiple meanings of the word are used interchangeably. Individuals use the word ''art'' to identify painting, as well as singing.
Characteristics of art
There follow some generally accepted characteristics of art after this there is some lengthier discussion of several of those facets perceived as universal or central to art:
encourages an intuitive understanding rather than a rational understanding, as, for example, with an article in a scientific journal
was created with the intention of evoking such an understanding, or an attempt at such an understanding, in the audience
was created with no other purpose or function other than to be itself (a radical, "pure art" definition)
elusive, in that the work may communicate on many different levels of appreciation one may take the example of Gericault's ''Raft of the Medusa'', in the case of which special knowledge concerning the shipwreck the painting depicts is not a prerequisite to appreciating it, but allows the appreciation of Gericault's political intentions in the piece
in relation to the above, the piece may offer itself to many different interpretations, or, though it superficially depicts a mundane event or object, invites reflection upon elevated themes
demonstrates a high level of ability or fluency within a medium this characteristic might be considered a point of contention, since many modern artists (most notably, conceptual artists) do not themselves create the works they conceive, or do not even create the work in a conventional, demonstrative sense (one might think of Tracey Emin's controversial ''My Bed'')
the conferral of a particularly appealing or aesthetically satisfying structure or form upon an original set of unrelated, passive constituents.
Skill
Art can connote a sense of trained ability or mastery of a medium. An example of this is the contemporary young master Josignacio, creator of Plastic Paint Medium. It can also simply refer to the developed and efficient use of a language so as to convey meaning, with immediacy and or depth.
A common view is that the epithet 'art' (particular in its elevated sense) requires a certain level of creative expertise by the artist, whether this be a demonstration of technical ability (such as one might find in many works of the Rennaissance or in the plays of Shakespeare) or an originality in stylistic approach, or a combination of these two.
For example, a common contemporary criticism of some modern painting occurs along the lines of objecting to the apparent lack of skill or ability required in the production of the artistic object. One might take Tracey Emin's ''My Bed'' or Hirst's ''The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living'', as examples of pieces wherein the artist exercised little to no traditionally recognised sets of skills. In the first case, Emin simply slept (and engaged in other activities) in her bed before placing the result in a gallery. She has, however, been insistent that there is a high degree of selection and arrangement in this work, which includes objects such as underwear and bottles around the bed. In the second case, Hirst came up with the conceptual design for the artwork. Although he physically particpated in the creation of this piece, he has left the eventual creation of many other works to employed artisans. These approaches are exemplary of a particular kind of contemporary art: conceptual art.
The exclusionary view that art requires a certain skill level to produce is often described as a lay critique. It derives from the fact that in Western culture at least, art has traditionally been pushed in the direction of representationalism, the literal presentation of reality through literal images. On the other hand, criticism has often been brought to bear on modern artists for having no creative involvement whatsoever in their creations: one might take Hirst's work again as emblematic of this approach. It may be further noted that certain forms of art outside a Western tradition, such as Islamic geometric designs and calligraphy, Buddhist or Hindu mandalas and Celtic knotwork, though they are non representational, still require a measure of skill and certain creative involvement in their execution.
Judgments of value
Somewhat in relation to the above, the word ''art'' is also used to apply judgments of value, as in such expressions as "that meal was a work of art" (the cook is an artist), or "the art of deception," (the highly attained level of skill of the deceiver is praised). It is this use of the word as a measure of high quality and high value that gives the term its flavor of subjectivity.
Making judgments of value requires a basis for criticism: at the simplest level, a way to determine whether the impact of the object on the senses meets the criteria to be considered ''art'', whether it is perceived to be attractive or repellent. Though perception is always colored by experience, and thus a reaction to art on these grounds is necessarily subjective, it is commonly taken that that which is not aesthetically satisfying in some fashion cannot be art. However, "good" art is not always, or even regularly, aesthetically appealing to a majority of viewers. In other words, an artist's prime motivation need not be the pursuit of the aesthetic, and art often depicts terrible images made for social, moral, or thought provoking reasons for example, Francisco Goya's painting depicting the Spanish shootings of 3rd of May 1808 is a graphic depiction of a firing squad executing several pleading civilians, yet at the same time, the horrific imagery demonstrates Goya's keen artistic ability in composition and execution, and his fitting social and political outrage. Thus the debate continues as to what mode of aesthetic satisfaction, if any, is required to define 'art'.
The assumption of new values or the rebellion against accepted notions of what is aesthetically superior need not occur concurrently with a complete abandonment of the pursuit of that which is aesthetically appealing. Indeed, the reverse is often true, that in the revision of what is popularly conceived of as being aesthetically appealing allows for a re invigoration of aesthetic sensibility, and a new appreciation for the standards of art itself. Countless schools have proposed their own ways to define quality, yet they all seem to agree in at least one point: once their aesthetic choices are accepted, the value of the work of art is determined by its capacity to transcend the limits of its chosen medium in order to strike some universal chord, or by the rarity of the skill of the artist, or in its accurate reflection in what is termed the ''zeitgeist''.
Communicating emotion
Art appeals to human emotions. It can arouse aesthetic or moral feelings, and can be understood as a way of communicating these feelings. Artists have to express themselves so that their public is aroused, but they do not have to do so consciously. Art explores what is commonly termed as ''the human condition'' that is, essentially, what it is to be human, and art of a superior kind often brings about some new insight concerning humanity (not always positive) or demonstrates a level of skill so fine as to push forward the boundaries of collective human ability.
This is not to say that technical skill is a necessary prerequisite of art, but rather that a high degree of skill goes some way in conferring a judgement of high standard upon an artist or artwork.
Creative impulse
From one perspective, art is a generic term for any product of the creative impulse, out of which sprang all other human pursuits such as science via alchemy, and religion via shamanism. The term 'art' offers no true definition besides those based within the cultural, historical and geographical context in which it is applied. Though to the artists themselves, the impulse to create is undeniable an artist can no more deny that impulse than he she could ignore breathing (one might compare Kandinsky's inner necessity to this popular view). It is because of the overbearing need to create, in the face of financial ruin, public obscurity or political opposition, that artists are typically conceived of as unstable, even crazy, or misguided.
Differences in defining art
Definitions of art and aesthetic arguments usually proceed from one of several possible perspectives. Art may be defined by the intention of the artist as in the writings of Dewey. Art may be seen as being in the response emotion of the viewer as Tolstoy claims. In Danto's view, it can be defined as a character of the item itself or as a function of an object's context.
Plato
For Plato, art is a pursuit whose adherents are not to be trusted given that their productions imitate the sensory world (itself an imitation of the divine world of forms) art necessarily is an imitation of an imitation, and thus is hopelessly far from the source of the truth. Plato, it may be noted, barred artists from access to his ideal city, in his Republic.
Aristotle
Aristotle saw art in less of a bad light though he shared Plato's poor opinion of it, he nevertheless thought that art might serve the purpose of emotional catharsis. That is, by witnessing the sufferings and celebrations of actors onstage onlookers might vicariously experience these same feelings themselves, and thereby purge such negative feelings.
Institutional definition
Many people's opinions of what art is would fall inside a relatively small range of accepted standards, or "institutional definition of art" (George Dickie 1974). This derives from education and other social factors. Most people did not consider the depiction of a Brillo Box or a store bought urinal to be art until Andy Warhol and Marcel Duchamp (respectively) placed them in the context of art (i.e., the art gallery), which then provided the association of these objects with the values that define art (Although, strictly speaking, Warhol's artwork was not an actual Brillo box but an ''exact replica'' of one so it met the traditional criterion of skill at the very least).
Most viewers of these objects initially rejected such associations, because the objects did not, themselves, meet the accepted criteria. The objects needed to be absorbed into the general consensus of what art is before they achieved the near universal acceptance as art in the contemporary era. Once accepted and viewed with a fresh eye, the smooth, white surfaces of Duchamp's urinal are strikingly similar to classical marble sculptural forms, whether the artist intended it or not. This type of recontextualizing provides the same spark of connection expected from any traditionally created art. It should be noted, however, that Duchamps act might be as readily interpreted as a demonstration of the (not always beneficial) power of artistic institutions, rather than the universal art potentially inherent in all objects.
The placement of an object in an artistic context is not taken as a universal standard of art, but is a common characteristic of conceptual art, prevalent since the 1960s notably, the Stuckist art movement criticises this tendency of recent art.
Related issues
Social criticism
Art is often seen as belonging to one social class and excluding others. In this context, art is seen as a high status activity associated with wealth, the ability to purchase art, and the leisure required to pursue or enjoy it. The palaces of Versailles or the Hermitage in St. Petersburg with their vast collections of art, amassed by the fabulously wealthy royalty of Europe exemplify this view. Collecting such art is the preserve of the rich, in one viewpoint.
Before the 13th century in Europe, artisans were considered to belong to a lower caste, since they were essentially manual labourers. After Europe was re exposed to classical culture during the Renaissance, particularly in the nation states of what is now Italy (Florence, Siena), artists gained an association with high status. However, arrangements of "fine" and expensive goods have always been used by institutions of power as marks of their own status. This is seen in the 20th and 21st century by the commissioning or purchasing of art by big businesses and corporations as decoration for their offices.
Utility
There are many who ascribe to certain arts the quality of being non utilitarian. This fits within the "art as good" system of definitions and suffers from a class prejudice against labor and utility. Opponents of this view argue that all human activity has some utilitarian function, and these objects claimed to be "non utilitarian" actually have the rather mundane and banal utility of attempting to mystify and codify unworkable justifications for arbitrary social hierarchy. It might also be argued that non utilitarian is, in this context, a mis usage that art is not in and of itself, useless, but rather that it particularly use does not manifest itself in any traditionally demonstrable way (though advances in neuroscience may arguably enable the isolation of those associated cortices of the brain concerned with the creation or appreciation of art).
Art is also used by art therapists and some psychotherapists and clinical psychologists as art therapy. The end product is not the principal goal in this case rather a process of healing, through creative acts, is sought. The resultant piece of artwork may also offer insight into the troubles experienced by the subject and may suggest suitable approaches to be used in more conventional forms of psychiatric therapy.
The "use" of art from the artist s standpoint is as a means of expression. When art is conceived as a device, it serves several context and perspective specific functions. From the artist s perspective it allows one to symbolize complex ideas and emotions in an arbitrary language subject only to the interpretation of the self and peers.
In a social context, it can serve to soothe the soul and promote popular morale. In a more negative aspect of this facet, art is often utilised as a form of propaganda, and thus can be used to subtly influence popular conceptions or mood (in some cases, artworks are appropriated to be used in this manner, without the creator's initial intention).
From a more anthropological perspective, art is a way of passing ideas and concepts on to later generations in a (somewhat) universal language. The interpretation of this language is very dependent upon the observer s perspective and context, and it might be argued that the very subjectivity of art demonstrates its importance in providing an arena in which rival ideas might be exchanged and discussed, or to provide a social context in which disparate groups of people might congregate and mingle.
History of art
The term 'art history' typically refers to a historical examination of the various trends of the visual arts through certain periods of human history. It may also be taken to encompass a study of the theories of art, which may or may not include an examination of their historical context.
Symbols
Much of the development of individual artist deals with finding principles for how to express certain ideas through various kinds of symbolism. For example, Vasily Kandinsky developed his use of color in painting through a system of stimulus response, where over time he gained an understanding of the emotions that can be evoked by color and combinations of color. Contemporary artist Andy Goldsworthy, on the other hand, chose to use the medium of found natural objects and materials to arrange temporary sculptures.
Cultural differences of art
Several genres of art are grouped by cultural relevance, examples can be found in terms such as:
African art
American craft
Islamic art
Asian art as found in:
Buddhist art
Chinese art
Japanese art
Tibetan art
Thai art
Laotian art
Visual arts of the United States
Latin American art
See also
Aesthetics, the philosophy of beauty
Art criticism
Art groups
Art history
Art sale
Art school
Art styles, periods and movements
Art techniques and materials
Art theft
Artist
Definition of music
Applied art
Fine art
Modern art
Psychedelic art
Philosophy of art
''What Is Art?''
Further reading
Peter Magyar, ''Thought palaces.'' Amsterdam: Architectura Natura Press, 1999
Aristotle, ''Metaphysics''
Plato, ''Theory of forms''
Carl Jung, ''Man and his Symbols''
Gyorgy Doczi, ''The Power of Limits''.
Benedetto Croce, ''Aesthetic as Science of Expression and General Linguistic, 1902''
Louis Torres Michelle Marder Kamhi, ''What Art Is: The Esthetic Theory of Ayn Rand,'' Open Court, 2000
External links
'''Resources'''
Online Arts
Dictionary of art terms
Reference site
Art Topic Reference site
The International Art Directory
Comprehensive Art Encyclopedia
World History of Art
Online Educational Art Museum
Professional Links
Art
Art
an:Arte
ar:
ast:Arte
bg:
br:Arz
ca:Art
co:Arti
cs:Um n
da:Kunst
de:Kunst
el:
eo:Arto
es:Arte
et:Kunst
eu:Arte
fa:
fi:Taide
fr:Art
fy:Keunst
gl:Arte
he:
hi:
hr:Umjetnost
hu:M v szet
ia:Arte
id:Seni
io:Arto
it:Arte
ja:
ka:
ku:Huner
kw:Art
la:Ars
lad:Arte
lb:Konscht
li:Kuns
lt:Menas
mi:Toi
mk:
ms:Seni
nah:Toltecayotl
nap:Arte
nds:Kunst
nl:Kunst
nn:Kunst
no:Kunst
os:
pl:Sztuka
pt:Arte
ro:Art
ru:
scn:Arti
simple:Art
sl:Umetnost
sr:
sv:Konst
sw:Usanifu
tr:Sanat
vi:Ngh thu t
yi:
zh:
An '''actor''' is a person who acts, or plays a role, in an artistic production. The term commonly refers to someone working in movies, television, live theatre, or radio, and can occasionally denote a street entertainer. Besides playing dramatic roles, actors may also sing or dance or work only on radio or as a voice artist. A female actor may be known as an '''actress''', although the term "actor", is also used as a gender neutral term.
An actor usually plays a fictional character. In the case of a true story (or a fictional story that portrays real people) an actor may play a real person (or a fictional version of the same). Occasionally, actors appear as themselves.
Etymology
"Actor" is directly from the masculine Latin noun ''actor'' (feminine, ''actrix'') from the verb ''agere'' "'''to do''', to drive, to pass time" the suffix '' or'' "so. st. who performs the action indicated by the stem". Alternatively from Greek ''(aktor)'', leader, from the verb ''(ag )'', to lead or carry, to convey, to bring.
History
The first recorded case of an actor performing took place in 534 BC (probably on 23 November, though the changes in calendar over the years make it hard to determine exactly) when the Greek performer Thespis stepped on to the stage at the ''Theatre Dionysus'' and became the first person to speak words as a character in a play. The machinations of storytelling were immediately revolutionized. Prior to Thespis' act, stories were told in song and dance and in third person narrative, but no one had assumed the role of a character in a story. In honour of Thespis, actors are commonly called ''Thespians''. Theatrical myth to this day maintains that Thespis exists as a mischievous spirit, and disasters in the theatre are sometimes blamed on his ghostly intervention.
Actors were traditionally not people of high status, and in the Early Middle Ages travelling acting troupes were often viewed with distrust. However, this negative perception dramaticaly changed in 20th Century as acting became an honored and popular profession and art. Part of the reason is due to the rise of the popular appeal and access to dramatic film entertainment and the resulting rise of the movie star in social status and the large salaries they commanded. The combination of public presence and wealth had a profound rehabilitation to the image.
In the past, only men could become actors. In the ancient and medieval world, it was considered disgraceful for a woman to go on the stage, and this belief continued right up until the 17th century, when in Venice it was broken. In the time of William Shakespeare, women's roles were played by men or boys, though there is some evidence to suggest that women disguised as men also (illegally) performed.
Actors playing the opposite sex
Women sometimes play the roles of prepubescent boys, because in some regards a woman has a closer resemblance to a boy than does a man. The role of Peter Pan, for example, is traditionally played by a woman. The tradition of the principal boy in pantomime may be compared. An adult playing a child occurs more in theater than in film. The exception to this is voice actors in animated films, where boys are generally voiced by women, as heard in ''The Simpsons''. Opera has several 'pants roles' traditionally sung by women, usually mezzo sopranos. Examples are Hansel in ''H nsel und Gretel'', and Cherubino in ''The Marriage of Figaro''.
Mary Pickford played the part of Little Lord Fauntleroy in the first film version of the book. Linda Hunt won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in ''The Year of Living Dangerously'', in which she played the part of a man.
Having an actor play the opposite sex for comic effect is also a long standing tradition in comic theatre and film. Most of Shakespeare's comedies include instances of cross dressing, and both Dustin Hoffman and Robin Williams appeared in hit comedy films where they were required to play most scenes dressed as women. Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon famously posed as women to escape gangsters in the Billy Wilder film ''Some Like It Hot''.
Techniques of acting
Actors employ a variety of techniques that are learned through training and experience. Some of these are:
The rigorous use of the voice to communicate a character's lines and express emotion. This is achieved through attention to diction and projection through correct breathing and articulation. It is also achieved through the tone and emphasis that an actor puts on words
Physicalisation of a role in order to create a believable character for the audience and to use the acting space appropriately and correctly
Use of gesture to complement the voice, interact with other actors and to bring emphasis to the words in a play, as well as having symbolic meaning
Shakespeare is believed to have been commenting on the acting style and techniques of his era when Hamlet gives his famous advice to the players:
blockquoteSpeak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant it out herods Herod: pray you, avoid it. blockquote
blockquoteBe not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action with this special observance: o'erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve the censure of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably. blockquote
blockquoteO, reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready. blockquote
Acting awards
Academy Awards, also known as the Oscars, for film
Golden Globe Awards for film and television
Emmy Awards for television
Genie Awards for film
Gemini Awards for television
British Academy of Film and Television Arts Award for film and television
Tony Awards for the theatre (specifically, Broadway theatre)
European Theatre Awards for the theatre
Laurence Olivier Awards for the theatre
Screen Actors Guild Awards for actors in film and television
See also
Acting
Celebrities
Charisma
Method acting
Movie star
Stunt work
Lists of actors
Suggested reading
''An Actor Prepares'' by Konstantin Stanislavski (Theatre Arts Books, ISBN 0878309837, 1989)
''A Dream of Passion: The Development of the Method'' by Lee Strasberg (Plume Books, ISBN 0452261988, 1990)
''Sanford Meisner on Acting'' by Sanford Meisner (Vintage, ISBN 0394750594, 1987)
''Letters to a Young Actor'' by Robert Brustein (Basic Books, ISBN 0465008062, 2005).
''The Alexander Technique Manual'' by Richard Brennan (Connections Book Publishing ISBN 1 85906 163 X 2004)
Category:Entertainment occupations
ast:Actor
bg:
ca:Actor
cs:Herec
da:Skuespiller
de:Schauspieler
es:Actor
eo:Aktoro
fr:Acteur
gl:Actor
ko:
id:Aktor
it:Attore (spettacolo)
he:
lt:Aktorius
hu:Sz n sz
ms:Pelakon
nl:Acteur
ja:
no:Skuespiller
nn:Skodespelar
pl:Aktor
pt:Ator
ru:
sq:Aktor
simple:Actor
sk:Herec
sl:Filmski igralec
sr:
fi:N yttelij
sv:Sk despelare
vi:Di n vi n
uk:
zh:
REDIRECT History of Albania
:''See also :'' Albania
REDIRECT Geography of Albania
:''See also :'' Albania
Taxobox
color pink
name Agnostida
image Peronopsis.jpg
image width 250px
image caption ''Peronopsis interstrictus''
regnum Animalia
phylum Arthropoda
classis Trilobita
ordo '''Agnostida'''
ordo authority Salter, 1864
subdivision ranks Families
subdivision
'''Suborder Agnostina'''br
'''Superfamily Agnostoidea'''
Agnostidae
Ammagnostidae
Clavagnostidae
Diplagnostidae
Doryagnostidae
Glyptagnostidae
Metagnostidae
Peronopsidae
Ptychagnostidae
'''SuperfamilyCondylopygoidea'''
Condylopygidae
'''Suborder Eodiscina'''br
'''SuperfamilyEodiscoidea'''
Calodiscidae
Eodiscidae
Hebediscidae
Tsunyidiscidae
Weymouthiidae
Yukoniidae
'''Agnostida''' (the '''agnostids''') is an order of trilobite. These small trilobites first appeared toward the end of the lower Cambrian and thrived in the middle Cambrian. The last agnostids held out until the late Ordovician.
The Agnostida are divided into two suborders Agnostina and Eodiscina that are then divided into a number of families. The Eodiscina appear to be "normal" trilobites with only two or three segments in the thorax some resemble trilobites of the order Ptychopariida. As a group, agnostids have ''pygidia'' (tails) that are similar in size and shape to their ''cephalons'' (heads). Neither looks much like the corresponding regions of other trilobites. There has been more than one argument about which end is the "head".
Agnostids were probably benthic (bottom dwelling) creatures. Most agnostid species have no eyes. They likely lived on areas of the ocean floor that received little or no light and fed on detritus that descended from upper layers of the sea to the bottom.
Unfortunately, the appendages are known only for one genus of agnostid. The legs of that genus look much more like crustacean legs than the legs of other trilobites with preserved appendages. This has caused many taxonomists to question whether the agnostids are truly trilobites. Another view is that the agnostids represent the first line to have diverged from the trilobites. However, four orders of trilobites (Redlichiida, Corynexochida, Naraoidia, Ptychopariida) considerably predate the earliest Agnostids in the fossil record.
Agnostina are generally referred to simply as "agnostids" even though they probably should be called "agnostines".
External links
By Sam Gon III
Category:Prehistoric arthropods
de:Agnostida
! Note to editors: This article has a long and intense history of terminology debates. Please review the talk page before making changes to lines to see if there is a previous established consensus or compromise. Thank you.
An '''abortion''' is the termination of a pregnancy associated with the death of an embryo or a fetus. This can occur spontaneously, in the form of a miscarriage, or be intentionally induced through chemical, surgical, or other means. Generally, abortions are performed by gynaecologists or obstetricians. All mammalian pregnancies can be aborted however, this article focuses exclusively on the abortion of human pregnancy.
There have been various methods of inducing an abortion throughout the centuries. In the 20th century, the ethics and morality of abortion became the subject of intense political debate in many areas of the world.
Definitions
Pregnancy is defined by the medical community as beginning at the implantation of the embryo. Others differ, however, placing this initiation at conception. The following medical terms are used to define an abortion:
''Spontaneous abortion (miscarriage)'': An abortion due to accidental trauma or natural causes.
''Induced abortion'': An abortion deliberately caused. Induced abortions are further subcategorized into therapeutic abortions and elective abortions:
''Therapeutic abortion''
To save the life of the pregnant woman.
To preserve the woman's physical or mental health.
To terminate a pregnancy that would result in the birth of a child with defects which would be incompatible with life or associated with significant morbidity.
To selectively reduce the number of fetuses in a multiple pregnancy to lessen health risks involved.
''Elective abortion'': An abortion performed for any other reason.
Methods of birth control that prevent implantation, such as emergency contraception, are not considered to be abortion however, emergency contraception is generally considered equivalent to abortion by those who reject the medical definition of pregnancy.
A pregnancy that ends earlier than 37 completed weeks of gestation, and where an infant is born and survives, is termed a premature birth. A pregnancy that ends with an infant dead upon birth at any gestational stage, due to causes including spontaneous abortion or complications during delivery, is termed a stillbirth.
In common parlance, the term "abortion" is synonymous with induced abortion of a human fetus.
Incidence
The incidence of and reasons for induced abortion vary in regions in which abortion is generally permitted.
It has been estimated that the total number of induced abortions performed globally is approximately 46 million per year. 26 million of these are said to occur in places in which abortion is legal the other 20 million happen where it is illegal. Some countries, such as Belgium and the Netherlands, experience a low rate of induced abortion, while others like Russia and Vietnam have a comparatively high rate.
A 1998 study aggregated data from studies in 27 countries on the reasons women seek to terminate their pregnancies. It concluded that common factors cited to have influenced the abortion decision were the desire to delay or end childbearing, concern over the interruption of work or education, issues of financial or relationship stability, and perceived immaturity. In Finland and the United States, concern for the health risks posed by pregnancy in individual cases was not a factor commonly given, whereas in Bangladesh, India, and Kenya such a concern was found to be more prevalent. A 2004 study in which American women at clinics answered a questionnaire yielded similar results.
Some abortions are undergone as the result of societal pressures, such as eugenics, the stigmatization of disabled persons, preference for children of a specific sex, disapproval of single motherhood, insufficient economic support for families, lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods, or efforts toward population control (such as China's one child policy). A combination of these factors can sometimes result in forced abortion, forced sterilization, infanticide, child abandonment, or sex selective abortion and infanticide which is illegal in most countries, but difficult to stop. In many areas, especially in developing nations or where abortion is illegal, women sometimes resort to "back alley" or self induced procedures. The World Health Organization suggests that there are 19 million terminations annually which fit its criteria for an unsafe abortion. See social issues for more information on these subjects.
Forms of abortion
Spontaneous abortion
! improve me!
Spontaneous abortions, generally referred to as miscarriages, occur when an embryo or fetus is lost due to natural causes. A miscarriage is spontaneous loss of the embryo or fetus before the 20th week of development. Spontaneous abortions after the 20th week are generally considered to be preterm deliveries. Most miscarriages occur very early in a pregnancy. Approximately 10 50 of pregnancies end in miscarriage, depending upon the age and health of the pregnant woman.
The risk for spontaneous abortion is greater in those with a history of more than three previous (known) spontaneous abortions, those who have had a previous induced abortion, those with systemic diseases, and in women over age 35.
Other causes can be infection (of either the woman or the fetus), immune responses, or serious systemic diseases of the woman.
A spontaneous abortion can also be caused by accidental trauma intentional trauma to cause miscarriage is considered an induced abortion. Some governments have laws increasing the criminal liability of a person who causes a miscarriage during an assault or other violent crime.
Induced abortion
A pregnancy can be intentionally aborted in a number of ways. The manner selected depends chiefly upon the gestational age of the fetus, in addition to the legality, regional availability, and or doctor patient preference for specific procedures.
Surgical abortion
In the first fifteen weeks, suction aspiration or vacuum abortion is the most common method. ''Manual vacuum aspiration'', or MVA abortion, consists of removing the fetus or embryo by suction using a manual syringe, while the ''Electric vacuum aspiration'' or EVA abortion method uses an electric pump. These techniques are equivalent, differing only in the mechanism use to apply suction. From the fifteenth week up until around the twenty sixth week, a surgical dilation and evacuation (D E) is used. D E consists of opening the cervix of the uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction.
''Dilation and curettage'' (D C) is a standard gynaecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons, including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy, investigation of abnormal bleeding, and abortion. ''Curettage'' refers to the cleaning of the walls of the uterus with a curette. The World Health Organization recommends this sort of procedure, also called Sharp Curettage, only when MVA is unavailable. Sharp curettage only accounted for 2.4 of abortion procedures in the US in 2002. The term "D and C" can more generally be used to refer to the first trimester abortion procedure, irrespective of the method used to perform the procedure.
Other techniques must be used to induce abortion in the third trimester. Premature delivery can be induced with prostaglandin this can be coupled with injecting the amniotic fluid with caustic solutions containing saline or urea. Very late abortions can be brought about by intact dilation and extraction (intact D X), which requires the surgical decompression of the fetus's head before evacuation, and is sometimes termed "partial birth abortion." A hysterotomy abortion, similar to a caesarian section but resulting in a terminated fetus, can also be used at late stages of pregnancy. It can be performed vaginally, with an incision just above the cervix, in the late mid trimester.
Chemical abortion
Effective in the first trimester of pregnancy, chemical (also referred to as a medical abortion), or non surgical abortions comprise 10 of all abortions in the United States and Europe. The process begins with the administration of either methotrexate or mifepristone, followed by misoprostol. When appropriately used, 98 of women undergoing medical termination of pregnancy will experience completed abortion without surgical intervention. The Food and Drug Administration currently approves the use of mifepristone up to 49 days gestation (7 weeks), though evidence based regimens exist for its use up to 61 days gestation with similar success rates. Misoprostol alone can also be used, though it is not FDA approved for this purpose. Misoprostol (Cytotec) alone has the advantage of costing less than one dollar for an effective dose, as opposed to several hundred dollars for an effective dose of mifepristone. In cases of failure of medical abortion, vacuum or manual aspiration is used to complete the abortion surgically.
Other means of abortion
Historically, a number of herbs reputed to possess abortifacient properties have been used in folk medicine: tansy, pennyroyal, black cohosh, and the now extinct silphium (see history of abortion). The use of herbs in such a manner can cause serious even lethal side effects, such as multiple organ failure, and is not recommended by physicians.
Abortion is sometimes attempted through means of trauma to the abdomen. The degree of force applied, if severe, can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing miscarriage. Both accidental and deliberate abortions of this kind can be subject to criminal liability in many countries. In Burma, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand, there is an ancient tradition of attempting abortion through forceful abdominal massage.
Reported methods of unsafe, self induced abortion include the misuse of the ulcer drug Misoprostol and the insertion of non surgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes hangers into the uterus.
Health effects
! MAJOR REORG NEEDED. Entire section is argumentative, and biased: See Talk.
Early term surgical abortion is a simple procedure, and when performed by competent doctors (and in some states, nurse practitioners, nurse midwives and physician assistants) in first world nations (before the 16th week), is safer than carrying the pregnancy to term. ! As I pointed out earlier, listing the negatives of this generally safe procedure first would be biased.
As with most surgical procedures, the most common surgical abortion methods carry the risk of potentially serious complications. These risks include: a perforated uterus, perforated bowel or bladder, septic shock, sterility, and death. The risk of complications occurring can increase depending on how far the pregnancy has progressed, but may be counterbalanced by complications that would occur from carrying the pregnancy to term.
It is difficult to accurately assess the risks of induced abortion due to a number of factors. These factors include wide variation in the quality of abortion services in different societies and among different socio economic groups, a lack of uniform definitions of terms, and difficulties in patient follow up and after care. The degree of risk is also dependent upon the skill and experience of the practitioner maternal age, health, and parity gestational age pre existing conditions methods and instruments used medications used the skill and experience of those assisting the practitioner and the quality of recovery and follow up care. A highly skilled practitioner, operating under ideal conditions, will tend to have a very low rate of complications an inexperienced practitioner in an ill equipped and ill staffed facility, on the other hand, will often have a higher incidence of complications.
In the United Kingdom, the number of deaths due to legal abortion between the years of 1991 and 1993 was 5, as compared to the 9 deaths caused by ectopic pregnancy during the same time frame. In the United States, during the year 1999, there were a total of 4 deaths due to legal abortion. ! need to compare the number of abortions and the number of pregnancies for these numbers to relate
Some practitioners advocate using minimal anesthesia so that the patient can alert them to possible complications. Others recommend general anesthesia, in order to prevent patient movement, which might cause a perforation. General anesthesia carries its own risks, including death, which is why public health officials recommend against its routine use.
Dilation of the cervix carries the risk of cervical tears or perforations, including small tears that might not be apparent and might cause cervical incompetence in future pregnancies. Most practitioners recommend using the smallest possible dilators, and using osmotic rather than mechanical dilators after the first trimester of pregnancy.
Instruments are placed within the uterus to remove the fetus. These can, on rare occasions, cause perforation or laceration of the uterus, and damage to structures surrounding the uterus. Laceration or perforation of the uterus or cervix can, again on rare occasions, lead to even more serious complications.
Incomplete emptying of the uterus can cause hemorrhage and infection. Use of ultrasound verification of the location and duration of the pregnancy prior to abortion, with immediate follow up of patients reporting continuing pregnancy symptoms after the procedure, will virtually eliminate this risk. The sooner a complication is noted and properly treated, the lower the risk of permanent injury or death.
In rare cases, the abortion will be unsuccessful and the pregnancy will continue. An unsuccessful abortion can also result in the delivery of a live neonate, or infant. This, termed a failed abortion, is more likely to occur if the procedure is carried out later in the pregnancy. Some doctors faced with this situation have voiced concerns about the ethical and legal ramifications of then letting the neonate die. As a result, recent investigations have been launched in the United Kingdom by the Confidential Enquiry into Maternal and Child Health (CEMACH) and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, in order to determine how widespread the problem is and what an ethical response in the treatment of the infant might be.
Use of other methods (e.g., overdose of various drugs, insertion of various objects into uterus) for abortion is potentially dangerous, carrying a significantly elevated risk for permanent injury or death compared to abortions done by physicians.
Suggested effects
There is controversy over a number of proposed risks and effects of abortion. Evidence, whether in support of or against such claims, might in part be influenced by the political and religious beliefs of the parties behind it.
Breast cancer
The ''abortion breast cancer (ABC) hypothesis'' posits a causal relationship between having an induced abortion and a higher risk of developing breast cancer in the future. An increased level of estrogen in early pregnancy helps to initiate cellular differentiation (growth) in the breast in preparation for lactation. If this process is terminated, through abortion, before full differentiation in the third trimester, then more "vulnerable" undifferentiated cells will be left than there were prior to the pregnancy. It is proposed that this might result in an elevated risk of breast cancer. The majority of interview based studies have indicated a link, and some have been demonstrated to be statistically significant, but there remains debate as to their reliability because of possible response bias.
Larger and more recent record based studies, such as one in 1997 which used data from two national registries in Denmark, found the correlation to be negligible to non existent after statistical adjustment. The National Cancer Institute conducted an official workshop with dozens of experts on the issue, between February 24 February 26, 2003, which concluded from its examination of various evidence that it is "well established" that "induced abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk." These findings and how the Denmark study statistically adjusted their overall results have been disputed by Dr. Joel Brind, an invitee to the workshop and the leading scientific advocate of the abortion breast cancer hypothesis. Nevertheless, gaps and inconsistencies remain in the research, and the subject continues to be one of political and scientific contention.
Fetal pain
The experience of the fetus during abortion is a matter of medical, ethical and public policy concern. Evidence is conflicting, with some authorities holding that the fetus is capable of feeling pain from the first trimester, and others maintaining that the neuro anatomical requirements for such experience do not exist until the second or third trimester.
Pain receptors begin to appear in the seventh week of pregnancy. The thalamus, the part of the brain which receives signals from the nervous system and then relays them to the cerebral cortex, starts to form in the fifth week. However, other anatomical structures involved in the nociceptic process are not present until much later in gestation. Links between the thalamus and cerebral cortex aren't forged until around the 23rd week.
Researchers have observed changes in the heart rates and hormonal levels of newborn infants after circumcision, blood tests, and surgery effects which were alleviated with the administration of anesthesia. Others suggest that the human experience of pain, being more than just physiological, cannot be measured in such reflexive responses.
Mental health
Some women will experience negative feelings as a result of elective abortion. However, whether this phenomenon is significant enough to warrant a general diagnosis, or even classification as an independent syndrome (see post abortion syndrome), is a subject that is debated among members of the medical community.
Data on the incidence of clinical depression, mental illness, post traumatic stress disorder, and suicide in association with abortion remain inconclusive. A comparative analysis of the suicide rates among postpartum and post abortive women in Finland found a statistical correlation between abortion and suicide.
Other studies have suggested a link between the elective termination of an unwanted pregnancy and an improvement in reported mental well being. Elective abortion may reduce the occurrence of depression in cases of unwanted pregnancy, as compared to cases in which the pregnancy has been carried to completion, but it is also sometimes reported as an additional stressor (ibid.). The majority of evidence would seem to indicate that adverse emotional reactions to the procedure are most strongly influenced by pre existing psychological conditions and other negative factors (ibid.).
Spontaneous abortion, or miscarriage, is known to present an increased risk of depression in women.
History of abortion
The practice of induced abortion, according to some anthropologists, can be traced to ancient times. There is evidence to suggest that, historically, pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods, including the administration of abortifacient herbs, the use of sharpened implements, the application of abdominal pressure, and other techniques.
Soranus, a 2nd century Greek physician, suggested in his work ''Gynecology'' that women wishing to abort their pregnancies should engage in violent exercise, energetic jumping, carrying heavy objects, and riding animals. He also prescribed a number of recipes for herbal bathes, pessaries, and bloodletting, but advised against the use of sharp instruments to induce miscarriage due to the risk of organ perforation. It is also known that the ancient Greeks relied upon the herb silphium as both a contraceptive and an abortifacient. The plant, as the chief export of Cyrene, was driven to extinction, but it is suggested that it might have possessed the same abortive properties as some of its closest extant relatives in the Apiaceae family.
Such folk remedies, however, varied in effectiveness and were not without risk. Tansy and pennyroyal, for example, are two poisonous herbs with serious side effects that have at times been used to terminate pregnancy.
19th century medicine saw advances in the fields of surgery, anaesthesia, and sanitation, in the same era that doctors with the American Medical Association lobbied for bans on abortion in The United States and the British Parliament passed the Offences Against the Person Act. Demand for the procedure continued, however, as the disguised, but nonetheless open, advertisement of abortion services in Victorian times would seem to suggest.
Social issues
A number of of complex issues exist in the debate over abortion. These, like the suggested effects upon health listed above, are a focus of research and a fixture of discussion among members on all sides the controversy.
Effect upon crime rate
A controversial theory attempts to draw a correlation between the unprecedented nationwide decline of the overall crime rate witnessed in the United States during the 1990s and the decriminalization of abortion 20 years prior.
The suggestion was brought to widespread attention by a 1999 academic paper, ''The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime'', authored by the economists Steven D. Levitt and John Donohue. They attributed the drop in crime to a reduction in individuals said to have a higher statistical probability of committing crimes: unwanted children, especially those born to mothers who are African American, impoverished, adolescent, uneducated, and single. The change coincided with what would've been the adolescence, or peak years of potential criminality, of those who had not been born as a result of ''Roe v. Wade'' and similar cases. Donohue and Levitt's study also noted that states which legalized abortion before the rest of the nation experienced the lowering crime rate pattern earlier and that those with higher abortion rates had more pronounced reductions.
Fellow economists Christopher Foote and Christopher Goetz criticized the methodology in the Donahue Levitt study, noting a lack of accommodation for statewide yearly variations such as cocaine use, and recalculating based on incidence of crime per capita they found no statistically significant results. Levitt and Donohue responded to this by presenting an adjusted data set which took into account these concerns but, they claim, maintained the statistical significance of their initial paper.
Such research has been criticized by some as being utilitarian, discriminatory as to race and socioeconomic class, and as promoting eugenics as a solution to crime. Levitt states in his book, ''Freakonomics'', that they are neither promoting nor negating any course of action merely reporting data as economists.
Sex selective abortion
The advent of both ultrasound and amniocentesis has allowed parents to determine sex before birth. This has lead to the occurrence of sex selective abortion or the targeted termination of a fetus based upon its gender.
It is suggested that sex selective abortion might be partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the birth rates of male and female children in some places. The preference for male children is reported in many areas of Asia, and the use of abortion to limit female births has been reported in Mainland China, Taiwan, South Korea, and India.
In India, the economic role of men, the costs associated with dowries, and a Hindu tradition which dictates that funeral rites must be performed by a male relative have lead to a cultural preference for sons. The widespread availability of diagnostic testing, during the 1970s and '80s, lead to advertisements for services which read, "Invest 500 rupees for a sex test now, save 50,000 rupees for a dowry later." In 1991, the male to female sex ratio in India was skewed from its biological norm of 105 to 100, to an average of 108 to 100. Researchers have asserted that between 1985 and 2005 as many as 10 million female fetuses may have been selectively aborted. The Indian government passed an official ban of pre natal sex screening in 1994 and moved to pass a complete ban of sex selective abortion in 2002.
In the People's Republic of China, there is also a historic son preference. The implementation of the one child policy in 1979, in response to population concerns, lead to an increased disparities in the sex ratio as parents attempted to circumvent the law through sex selective abortion or the abandonment of unwanted daughters. Sex selective abortion might be a part of what is behind the shift from the baseline male to female birth rate to an elevated national rate of 117:100 reported in 2002. The trend was more pronounced in rural regions: as high as 130:100 in Guangdong and 135:100 in Hainan. A ban upon the practice of sex selective abortion was enacted in 2003.
Unsafe abortion
Where and when access to safe abortion has been barred, due to explicit sanctions or general unavailability, women seeking to terminate their pregnancies have sometimes resorted to unsafe methods.
"Back alley abortion" is a slang term for any abortion not practiced under ideal conditions of sanitation and professionalism. The World Health Organization defines an unsafe abortion as being, "a procedure...carried out by persons lacking the necessary skills or in an environment that does not conform to minimal medical standards, or both." This can include a person without medical training, a professional health provider operating in sub standard conditions, or the woman herself.
Unsafe abortion remains a public health concern today due to the higher incidence and severity of its associated complications, such as incomplete abortion, sepsis, hemorrhage, and damage to internal organs. WHO estimates that 19 million unsafe abortions occur around the world annually and that 68,000 of these result in the death of a woman. Complications of unsafe abortion are said to account, globally, for approximately 13 of all maternal mortalities, with regional estimates including 12 in Asia, 25 in Latin America, and 13 in sub Saharan Africa. Health education, access to family planning, and improvements in healthcare during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon.
Abortion debate
Over the course of the history of abortion, induced abortions have been a source of considerable debate and controversy regarding the morality and legality of this practice. An individual's position on the complex ethical, moral, philosophical, biological, and legal issues have a strong relationship with that individual's value system. A person's position on abortion may be best described as a combination of their personal beliefs on the morality of abortion, and that person's beliefs on the ethical scope and responsibility of legitimate governmental and legal authority. Another factor for many individuals is religious doctrine (see religion and abortion).
Abortion debates, especially pertaining to abortion laws, are often spearheaded by advocacy groups belonging to one of two camps. Most often those in favor of legal prohibition of abortion describe themselves as pro life while those against legal restrictions on abortion describe themselves as pro choice. Both are used to indicate the central principles in arguments for and against abortion: "Is the fetus a human being with a fundamental right to ''life''?" for pro life advocates, and, for those who are pro choice, "Does a woman have the right to ''choose'' whether or not to have an abortion?"
In both public and private debate, arguments presented in favor of or against abortion focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced abortion, or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion. Arguments on morality and legality tend to collide and combine, complicating the issue at hand.
Debate also focuses on whether the pregnant woman should have to notify and or have the consent of others in distinct cases: a minor her parents a legally married or common law wife her husband or a pregnant woman the biological father. In a 2003 Gallup poll in the United States, 72 of respondents were in favor of spousal notification, with 26 opposed of those polled, 79 of males and 67 of females responded in favor.
Public opinion
Political sides have largely been divided into absolutes. The abortion debate, as such, tends to center around individuals who hold strong positions. However, public opinion varies from poll to poll, country to country, and region to region:
'''Australia''': In a February 2005 AC Nielsen poll, as reported in The Age, 56 thought the current abortion laws, which generally allow abortion for the sake of life or health, were "about right," 16 want changes in law to make abortion "more accessible," and 17 want changes to make it "less accessible." A 1998 poll, conducted by Roy Morgan Research, asked, "Do you approve of the termination of unwanted pregnancies through surgical abortion?" 65 of the Australians polled stated that they approved of surgical abortion and 25 stated that they disapproved of it.
'''Canada''': A recent poll of Canadians, conducted in April 2005 by Gallup, found that 52 of those polled want abortion laws to "remain the same," 20 want the laws to be "less strict," and 24 would prefer that the laws become "more strict." An earlier Gallup poll, from December 2001, asked, "Do you think abortions should be legal under any circumstances, legal only under certain circumstances or illegal in all circumstances and in what circumstances?" 32 of Canadians responded that they believe abortion should be legal in all circumstance, 52 that it should be legal in certain circumstances, and 14 that it should be legal in no circumstances. See Abortion in Canada.
'''Ireland''': A 1997 Irish Times MRBI poll of the Republic of Ireland's electorate found that 18 believe that abortion should never be permitted, 35 that one should be allowed in the event that the woman's life is threatened, 18 if her health is at risk, 28 that "an abortion should be provided to those who need it," and 5 were undecided.
'''The United Kingdom''': An online YouGov Daily Telegraph poll in August 2005 found that 30 of Britons would back a measure to reduce the legal limit for abortion to 20 weeks, 19 support a limit of 12 weeks, 9 support a limit of less than 12 weeks, and 25 support maintaining the current limit of 24 weeks. 6 responded that abortion should never be allowed while 2 said it should be permitted throughout the entirety of pregnancy.
'''The United States''': In a January 2006 CBS News poll, which asked, "What is your personal feeling about abortion?", 27 said that abortion should be "permitted in all cases," 15 that it should be "permitted, but subject to greater restrictions than it is now," 33 that it should be "permitted only in cases such as rape, incest or to save the woman's life," 17 that it should "only be permitted to save the woman's life," and 5 that it should "never" be permitted. A November 2005 Pew Research Center poll asked "In 1973 the Roe versus Wade decision established a woman's constitutional right to an abortion, at least in the first three months of pregnancy. Would you like to see the Supreme Court completely overturn its Roe versus Wade decision, or not?", with 29 indicating they want it overturned, and 65 that they do not.
Abortion law
The Soviet Union (1920) and Iceland (1935) were some of the first countries to generally allow abortion. The second half of the twentieth century saw the liberalization of abortion laws in many other countries. In 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down state laws banning abortion, ruling that such laws violated an inferred right to privacy in the U.S. Constitution. The Supreme Court of Canada, similarly, discarded its criminal code regarding abortion in 1988, after ruling that such restrictions violated the security of person guaranteed to women under in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in the case of R. v. Morgentaler. Canada later struck down provincial regulations of abortion in the case of R. v. Morgentaler (1993). Ireland, on the other hand, added an amendment to its Constitution in 1983 by popular referendum, recognizing "the right to life of the unborn" (see Abortion in Ireland).
Current laws pertaining to abortion are diverse. Religious, moral, and cultural sensibilities continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world. The right to life, the right to liberty, and the right to security of person are major issues of human rights that are sometimes used as justification for the existence or the absence of laws controlling abortion. Many countries in which abortion is legal require that certain criteria be met in order for an abortion to be obtained, often, but not always, using a trimester based system to regulate the window in which abortion is still legal to perform:
In the United States, some states impose a 24 hour waiting period before the procedure, prescribe the distribution of information on fetal development, or require that parents be contacted if their minor daughter requests an abortion.
In the United Kingdom, as in some other countries, two doctors must first certify that an abortion is medically or socially necessary before it can be performed.
Other countries, in which abortion is illegal, will allow one to be performed in the case of rape, incest, or danger to the pregnant woman's life or health. A handful of nations ban abortion entirely, such as Chile, El Salvador, and Malta.
See also
Abortion in Australia
Abortion in Canada
Abortion in Ireland
Abortion in the United Kingdom
Abortion in the United States
Adoption
Partial birth abortion
Pregnancy
Religion and abortion
Selective reduction
Self induced abortion
Wrongful abortion
Sources
"." (n.d.) Retrieved 2006 01 18 from Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology web site.
Henshaw, Stanley K., Singh, Susheela, Haas, Taylor. (1999). . ''International Family Planning Perspectives, 25 (Supplement)'', 30 8. Retrieved 2006 01 18.
Bankole, Akinrinola, Singh, Susheela, Haas, Taylor. (1998). . ''International Family Planning Perspectives, 24 (3)'', 117 127 152. Retrieved 2006 01 18.
Finer, Lawrence B., Frohwirth, Lori F., Dauphinee, Lindsay A., Singh, Shusheela, Moore, Ann M. (2005). . ''Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 37 (3),'' 110 8. Retrieved 2006 01 18.
World Health Organization. (2004). . Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Chan, Annabelle Sage, Leonie C. (2005). Estimating Australia s abortion rates 1985 2003 . ''Medical Journal of Australia, 182 (9),''447 52. Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2003 02 18). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Statistics Canada. (2005 02 11). . ''The Daily.'' Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics Canada. (2003 12 18). . ''The Daily.'' Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Dansmark Statistik. (2004 11 25). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics Denmark. (2005 02 01). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Vilain, Annick. Ministry for Employment, Social Cohesion and Housing. (2005, October). . '' tudes et R sultats, 431.'' Retrieved 2006 01 17.
National Institute for Demographic Studies. (n.d.) . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Federal Statistical Office Germany. (2005 03 09). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Federal Statistical Office Germany. (2006 01 24). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
"." (2005). Retrieved 2006 01 17 from Web Japan.
Statistics Bureau. (2004). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Ewing, Ian. Statistics New Zealand. (2005 06 15). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics New Zealand. (2005 05 15). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Statistics Norway. (2005 06 08). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics Norway. (2005). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Health Systems Trust. (n.d.) . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics South Africa. (2001 07 02). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Nilsson, Emma Ollars, Birgitta. The National Board of Health and Welfare. (2005, May). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
Statistics Sweden. (2006 01 13). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Government Statistical Service for the Department of Health. (2005 07 27). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
ISD Scotland. (2005 05 24). . Retrieved 2006 01 17.
National Statistics. (2005 08 25). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Finer, Lawrence B. Henshaw, Stanley K. The Alan Guttmacher Institute. (2005 05 18). . Retrieved January 17, 2006.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2006 01 04). . Retrieved 2006 01 28.
World Health Organization. (2003). . Retrieved 2006 02 24.
Strauss, Lilo T., Herndon, Joy, Chang, Jeani, Parker, Wilda Y., Bowens, Sonya V., Berg, Cynthia J. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2005 11 15). . ''Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report''. Retrieved 2006 02 20.
Ciganda, C., Laborde, A. (2003). . ''J Toxicol Clin Toxicol, 41(3),'' 235 9. Retrieved 2006 01 25.
Education for Choice. (2005 05 06). . Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Potts, Malcolm, Campbell, Martha. (2002). . ''Gynecology and Obstetrics'', vol. 6, chp. 8. Retrieved 2005 01 25.
Cates W., Jr, Tietze C. (1978). Standardized mortality rates associated with legal abortion: United States, 1972 1975 . ''Family Planning Perspectives, 10 (2)'', 109 12. Retrieved 2006 01 28.
Department of Health. (1998). ''.'' London: The Stationery Office. Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Elam Evans, Laurie. D., Strauss, Lilo T., Herndon, Joy, Parker, Wilda Y., Bowens, Sonya V., Zane, Suzanne, ''et al.'' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2003 11 23). ''.'' Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Rogers, Lois. (2005 11 27). "." ''The Sunday Times.'' Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Melbye M., Wohlfahrt, J., Olsen, J.H., Frisch, M., Westergaard, T., Helweg Larsen, K., ''et al.'' (1997). Induced abortion and the risk of breast cancer . ''New England Journal of Medicine, 336,'' 81 5. Retrieved 2006 01 11 from PubMed.
National Cancer Institute. (2003 03 04). . Retrieved 2006 01 11.
National Cancer Institute. (2003). . Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology. (1997). ''.'' Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Mulligan LaRossa, Maureen, Carter, Sheena L. (2005 02 07). ''Understanding How the Brain Develops.'' Retrieved 2006 01 11, from Emory University, Department of Pediatrics web site: .
Anand, K., Phil, D., Hickey, P.R. (1987). Pain and its effects on the human neonate and fetus. ''New England Journal of Medicine, 316 (21),'' 1321 9. Retrieved 2006 01 11 from .
Schmiege, S. Russo, N.F. (2005). Depression and unwanted first pregnancy: longitudinal cohort study . ''British Medical Journal, 331 (7528),'' 1303. Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Gissler, M., Hemminki, E., Lonnqvist, J. (1996). Suicides after pregnancy in Finland, 1987 94: register linkage study . ''British Medical Journal, 313,'' 1431 4. Retrieved 2006 01 11.
American Psychological Association. (2005). . Retrieved 2006 01 15 from .
''.'' (2002 04 01). Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Lefkowitz, Mary R. Fant, Maureen R. (1992). ''.'' Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press. Retrieved 2006 01 11.
''.'' (n.d.) Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Donohue, John J. and Levitt, Steven D. (2001). .''Quarterly Journal of Economics.'' Retrieved 2006 02 11.
Foote, Christopher L. and Goetz, Christopher F. (2005). . ''Working Papers, 05 15''. Retrieved 2006 02 11.
Donohue, John J. and Levitt, Steven D. (2006). Measurement error, legalized abortion, and the decline in crime: a response to Foote and Goetz (2005). Retrieved 2006 02 17, from University of Chicago, Initiative on Chicago Price Theory web site: .
"Crime Abortion Study Continues to Draw Pro life Backlash." (1999 08 11). ''The Pro Life Infonet.'' Retrieved 2006 02 17 from .
"." (2000, January). ''St. Anthony Messenger.'' Retrieved 2006 02 17.
Banister, Judith. (1999 03 16). . Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Mutharayappa, Rangamuthia, Kim Choe, Minja, Arnold, Fred, Roy, T.K. (1997). . ''National Family Health Survey Subject Reports, Number 3.'' Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Patel, Rita. (1996). The practice of sex selective abortion in India: may you be the mother of a hundred sons. Retrieved 2006 01 11, from University of North Carolina, University Center for International Studies web site: .
Sudha, S., Irudaya Rajan, S. (1999). . Retrieved 2006 01 12
Reaney, Patricia. (2006 01 09). "." ''Reuters AlertNet.'' Retrieved 2006 01 09.
Mudur, Ganapati. (2002). "." ''British Medical Journal: News Roundup.'' Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Graham, Maureen J., Larsen, Ulla, Xu, Xiping. (1998). . ''International Family Planning Perspectives, 24 (2).'' Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Plafker, Ted. (2002 05 25). . ''British Medical Journal: News Roundup.'' Retrieved 2006 01 12.
"." (2002 03 22). ''Xinhua News Agency.'' Retrieved 2006 01 12.
Salter, C., Johnson, H.B., and Hengen, N. (1997). . ''Population Reports, 25 (1).'' Retrieved 2006 02 22.
World Health Organization. (1998). . Retrieved 2006 03 01.
The Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. (2005 11 02). "." ''Pew Research Center Pollwatch.'' Retrieved 2006 03 01.
Grattan, Michelle. (2005 02 16). "." ''The Age.'' Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Roy Morgan International. (1998 03 03). . Retrieved 2006 01 11.
Kennedy, Geraldine. (1997 12 11). "." ''The Irish Times.'' Retrieved 2006 01 11.
YouGov. (2005 07 30). . Retrieved 2006 01 11.
''.'' (2006). Retrieved 2006 01 11.
The Pew Forum on Religion Public Life. (2005 11 29). . Retrieved 2006 01 12.
External links
! HELP KEEP THIS ARTICLE SHORT AND SIMPLE: DO NOT ADD MORE LINKS TO "BIASED" SECTION. ADD THEM TO WHICHEVER SUB ARTICLE WOULD BE APPROPRIATE INSTEAD. ALSO, PLEASE UNDERSTAND THAT SITES CONTAINING SHOCK MATERIAL SHALL, IN NO CASE, BE ACCEPTED. THANKS! !
'''The following links may be biased:'''
bg:
ca:Avortament
cs:Interrupce
da:Provokeret abort
de:Schwangerschaftsabbruch
es:Aborto
eo:Aborto
fr:Interruption volontaire de grossesse
id:Gugur kandungan
ia:Aborto
it:Aborto
he:
lt:Abortas
hu:Magzatelhajt s
nl:Abortus
ja:
no:Abort
nn:Abort
pl:Aborcja
pt:Interrup o da gravidez
ru:
simple:Abortion
sr:
fi:Abortti
sv:Abort
tl:Aborsiyon
tr:K rtaj
uk:
zh:
pam:Abortion
In law, an '''abstract''' is a brief statement that contains the most important points of a long legal document or of several related legal papers.
Abstraction of Title
The Abstraction of Title, used in real estate transactions, is the more common form of abstract. An abstract of title lists all the owners of a piece of land, a house, or a building before it came into possession of the present owner. The abstract also records all deeds, wills, mortgages, and other documents that affect ownership of the property. An abstract describes a chain of transfers from owner to owner and any agreements by former owners that are binding on later owners.
Clear Title
A Clear Title to property is one that clearly states any obligation in the deed to the property. It reveals no breaks in the chain of legal ownership. After the records of the property have been traced and the title has been found clear, it is sometimes guaranteed, or insured. In a few states, a more efficient system of insuring title real properties provides for registration of a clear title with public authorities. After this is accomplished, no abstract of title is necessary.
Patent law
In the context of patent law and specifically in prior art searches, searching through abstracts is a common way to find relevant prior art document to question to novelty or inventive step (or non obviousness in United States patent law) of an invention.
References
World Book encyclopedia 1988
See also
Academic conference
External links
, defining the requirements regarding the abstract in an international application filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
and , defining the abstract related requirements in a European patent application
Category:Legal research
REDIRECT A. E. van Vogt
:''See also:'' Internet troll
An '''AOLamer''' or AOL Lamer is a person using AOL that posts flamebait or other off topic messages in a newsgroup in order to disrupt the newsgroup.
During the early 1990s, many regular non AOL internet newsgroup users routinely killed all messages coming from AOL as many of the messages coming from AOL were non informative.
In addition, the term '''AOLamer''' is often used as a derogatory term for AOL subscribers by users of other internet service providers, who view AOL as a provider associated with people who know little about computers.
Category:America Online
Category:Internet trolling
fr:AOLamer
'''Alan Alda''' (born January 28, 1936 as '''Alphonso Joseph D'Abruzzo''') is an American actor, writer, director and sometimes political activist.
He is most famous for his role as Hawkeye Pierce in the television series ''M A S H''. In the 1970s and 1980s he was viewed as the archetypal "sensitive male", though in recent years he has appeared in roles which counter that image.
Family and early life
Alda was born in New York City. His Italian American father, Robert Alda (born Alphonso Giuseppe Giovanni Roberto D'Abruzzo), was a successful actor, and his mother Joan Brown was crowned "Miss New York" in a beauty pageant. The adopted surname "Alda" is a contraction of "'''AL'''phonso" and "'''D'A'''bruzzo".
When Alan Alda was growing up, his parents divorced.
Alan Alda contracted polio when he was seven years old, which kept him bedridden for two years as he received treatments.
Alan Alda's half brother, Anthony Alda was christened '''Antonio D'Abruzzo''' on the 9th of December 1956.
He received his bachelor's degree from Fordham University in 1956. During his junior year, he studied in Europe where he acted in a play in Rome and performed with his father on television in Amsterdam. After graduation, he joined the U.S. Army Reserve and served a six month tour of duty as a gunnery officer in Korea following the Korean War. A year after graduation, he married Arlene Weiss, with whom he has three daughters: Eve, Elizabeth and Beatrice. Arlene Alda is a well known photographer, author and clarinettist.
Raised as a devout Catholic, he has since left the church but continues to celebrate religious holidays and events. His specific religious beliefs are difficult to define.
He is also an activist for feminist causes, and has been for many years.
Acting career, fame, and ''M A S H''
Alda began his career in the 1950s as a member of the Compass Players comedy revue.
In the eleven years (72 83) he starred in ''M A S H'', he was nominated for 21 Emmy Awards winning five. He wrote (or co wrote) twenty episodes, and directed thirty episodes. When he won his first Emmy Award for writing, he was so happy that he performed a cartwheel before running up to the stage to accept the award. He also was the first person to win Emmy Awards for acting, writing, and directing for the same series. Interestingly enough, the late Richard Hooker, who wrote the novel on which ''M A S H'' was based, did not like Alan Alda's portrayal of Hawkeye Pierce (Hooker had based Hawkeye on himself), though Hooker didn't care for the show in general.
After ''M A S H''
Alda's prominence in the enormously successful ''M A S H'' gave him a platform to speak out on political topics, and he has been a strong and vocal supporter of women's rights. As such, he has been something of a boogeyman for some political social conservatives who disagree with his views.
He has also appeared in at least two TV commercials. Both of these were in the small computer industry, first for Atari and later, with the rest of the ''M A S H'' cast, for IBM's PS 2 product line with MicroChannel architecture.
Alan Alda has also played Nobel Prize winning physicist Richard Feynman in the play ''QED'', which has only one other character. Although Peter Parnell wrote the play, Alda both produced and inspired it. Alda has also appeared frequently in the films of Woody Allen, and he has been a guest star five times on ''ER'', playing Dr. Gabriel Lawrence.
As of 2004, Alda is a regular cast member on the NBC program ''The West Wing'', portraying Republican U.S. Senator and presidential hopeful Arnold Vinick. He made his premiere in the sixth season's tenth episode, "In The Room", and was added to the opening credits with the thirteenth episode, "King Corn."
Throughout his career, he has been nominated for the Emmy Award 31 times and the Tony Award twice, and has won seven People's Choice Awards, six Golden Globe awards, and three Director's Guild of America awards. However, it was not until 2004, after a long acting career, that Alda received his first nomination for an Academy Award. This was the Best Supporting Actor nomination for his role as Senator Ralph Owen Brewster in Martin Scorsese's film ''The Aviator''.
In the spring of 2005, Alda starred as Shelly Levene in the Tony Award winning Broadway revival of David Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' for which he received a Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actor in a Play.
It has become quite normal for Alda in his later roles to have some reference to his early work in ''M A S H''. For instance, both the senator he played in ''The Aviator'' and Hawkeye Pierce came from Maine. In a line on ''ER'', his character mentions that he uses a surgical technique he picked up in a "military hospital". The same character also undergoes a mental acuity test where he has to identify pictures of objects. He sees a funnel and identifies it as a martini glass without the base (Hawkeye Pierce was very fond of martinis). Alda's ''West Wing'' character has also made at least one reference to Korea when he said, "I could take these people to the DMZ and it still wouldn't take their minds off ethanol and abortion").
In 2005, Alda published his first round of memoirs, ''Never Have Your Dog Stuffed: and Other Things I've Learned'', published by Random House (ISBN 1400064090). Among other stories, he recalls his intestines becoming strangulated while on location in Chile for his PBS show ''Scientific American Frontiers''. He also talks about his mother's battle with schizophrenia.
Filmography
''Gone Are the Days!'' (1963)
''Paper Lion'' (1968)
''The Extraordinary Seaman'' (1969)
''Jenny'' (1970)
''The Moonshine War'' (1970)
''The Mephisto Waltz'' (1971)
''To Kill a Clown'' (1972)
''The Glass House'' (1972)
''Kill Me If You Can(TV)'' (1977)
''Same Time, Next Year'' (1978)
''California Suite'' (1978)
''The Seduction of Joe Tynan'' (1979) (also writer)
''The Four Seasons (movie)'' (1981) (also director and writer)
''Sweet Liberty'' (1986) (also director and writer)
''A New Life'' (1988) (also director and writer)
''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' (1989)
''Betsy's Wedding'' (1990) (also director and writer)
''Whispers in the Dark'' (1992)
''Manhattan Murder Mystery'' (1993)
''Canadian Bacon'' (1995)
''Flirting with Disaster'' (1996)
''Everyone Says I Love You'' (1996)
''Murder at 1600'' (1997)
''Mad City'' (1997)
''The Object of My Affection'' (1998)
''Keepers of the Frame'' (1999) (documentary)
''What Women Want'' (2000)
''The Aviator'' (2004)
External links
on NPR's ''Fresh Air'' (September 21, 2005)
web site
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan! The Aviator
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
Alda, Alan
da:Alan Alda
de:Alan Alda
es:Alan Alda
fr:Alan Alda
hu:Alda
nl:Alan Alda
no:Alan Alda
pl:Alan Alda
simple:Alan Alda
sv:Alan Alda
! NOTE TO EDITORS Remember, this is an introductory article to American football. It exists to give people who know little or nothing about the sport a basic understanding of the game. Information that does not fall under that description should go under American football strategy, American football rules, etc.
or vesica piscis shape, and usually has a large set of stitches along one side.
'''American football''', known in the United States ! but not Canada what they call "football"is actually the similar (but NOT identical) sport of Canadian football simply as '''football''', is a competitive team sport. The object of the game is to advance the football towards the opposing team's end zone and score points. The ball can be advanced by carrying the ball, or by throwing or handing it from one teammate to the other. Points can be scored in a variety of ways, including carrying the ball over the goal line, throwing the ball to another player past the goal line or kicking it through the goal posts. The winner is the team with the most points when the time expires.
Outside of the United States and a few other countries such as American Samoa, the sport is usually referred to as ''American football'' (or sometimes as gridiron) to differentiate it from other football games, especially association football (soccer) and rugby football. American football evolved as a separate sport from rugby football in the late 19th century. Arena football is a variant of American football. In Canada, the unqualified term "football" typically refers to Canadian football, a game which is a close relative of American football but different in several respects.
Popularity
Since the 1960s, football has surpassed baseball as the most popular spectator sport in the United States. The 32 team National Football League (NFL) is the most popular and only major professional American football league. Its championship game, the Super Bowl, is watched by nearly half of US television households, and is also televised in over 150 other countries. ''Super Bowl Sunday'' has become an annual ritual in late January or early February. Football is also the most watched sport on television in the US.
The NFL also operates a developmental league, NFL Europe, with 6 teams based in European cities.
player runs with the ball as an Air Force Academy player lines up a tackle.
! Possible image copyright issue
College football is also extremely popular throughout the U.S., especially in markets not served by an NFL team. Several college football stadiums seat more than 100,000 fans which regularly sell out. Even high school football games can attract five figure crowds, especially in hotbeds like Western Pennsylvania, Nebraska, Florida, Georgia and most especially Texas, Ohio, and California. The weekly autumn ritual of college and high school football which includes marching bands, cheerleaders and parties (including the ubiquitous tailgate party) is an important part of the culture in much of smalltown America. It is a long standing tradition in the United States (though not universally observed) that high school football games are played on Friday, college games on Saturday, and professional games on Sunday (with an additional professional game on Monday nights see ''Monday Night Football''). It is often said of an outstanding college football player that he is likely to "be playing on Sundays one day", meaning that he is a good pro prospect.
Certain fall and winter holidays most notably Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Years' Day have traditional football games associated with them.
Football is also played recreationally by amateur club and youth teams (e.g., the Pop Warner little league programs). There are also many "semi pro" teams in leagues where the players are paid to play, but at a small enough salary that they generally must also hold a full time job.
Pro football is played only in the United States and in the above mentioned NFL Europe league. The sport is popular as an amateur activity in Mexico and American Samoa and to a lesser extent in Japan, Europe and Australia.
A very similar sport, Canadian football, is widely played in Canada.
Organized football is played almost exclusively by men and boys, although a few amateur and semi professional women's leagues have begun play in recent years.
The rules of American football
! This section should only be a basic tutorial. Lengthy content should go to American football rules
The object of American football is to score more points than the opposing team within a set time limit.
Field and players
s to the nearest end zone.
The field is often called the ''gridiron'' because the markings on the field resemble a grill. The game is played on a rectangular field 120 yards (110 metres) long by 53 1 3 yards (49 metres) wide. The longer boundary lines are ''sidelines'', while the shorter boundary lines are ''end lines''. Near each end of the field is a ''goal line'' they are 100 yards apart. A scoring area called an ''end zone'' extends 10 yards beyond each goal line to each end line.
''Yard lines'' cross the field every 5 yards, and are numbered from each goal line to the 50 yard line, or midfield (similar to a typical rugby league field). Two rows of lines, known as ''hash marks'', parallel the side lines near the middle of the field. All plays start with the ball on or between the hash marks.
At the back of each end zone are two ''goal posts'' (also called ''uprights'') that are 18.5 feet apart. The posts are connected by a crossbar 10 feet from the ground. Successful kicks must go above the crossbar and between the uprights. (At many fields the uprights and crossbar are attached by a curved bar to a post outside the field of play, to reduce the chance of players running into the supports.)
Each team has 11 players on the field at a time. However, teams may substitute for any or all of their players between plays. As a result, players have very specialized roles, and almost all of the 53 players on an NFL team will play in any given game. Thus, teams are divided into three separate units: the offense, the defense and the special teams (see below). In the NFL, players' jersey numbers are distributed according to a strict system (e.g. quarterbacks always wear between 1 19).
Game duration
A standard football game consists of four 15 minute (typically 12 minutes in high school football) periods (called quarters), with an intermission (called halftime) after the second quarter. The clock stops after certain plays therefore, a game can last considerably longer (often more than three hours in real time). If an NFL game is tied after four quarters, the teams play up to another 15 minutes. In an NFL overtime game, the first team that scores wins if neither team scores, the game is a tie. College overtime rules are more complicated and are described at Overtime (sport).
Advancing the ball
Advancing the ball in American football resembles the ''six tackle rule'' and the ''play the ball'' in rugby league football. The team that takes possession of the ball (the '''offense''') has four attempts, called '''downs''', to advance the ball 10 yards towards their opponent's (the '''defense'''nowiki' nowikis) end zone. When the offense gains 10 yards, it gets a '''first down''', or another set of four downs to gain 10 yards. If the offense fails to gain a first down (10 yards) after 4 downs, it loses possession of the ball.
Except at the beginning of halves and after scores (see ''Kickoffs and free kicks'' below), the ball is always put into play by a '''snap'''. All players line up facing each other at the line of scrimmage (the position on the field where the play begins). One offensive player, the center, then passes (or "snaps") the ball between his legs to a teammate, usually the quarterback.
Players can then advance the ball in two ways:
By running with the ball, also known as '''rushing'''. One ball carrier can hand the ball to another this is known as a '''handoff'''.
By throwing the ball to a teammate, known as '''passing'''. The forward pass is a key factor distinguishing American and Canadian football from other football sports. The offense can throw the ball forward only once on a play and only from behind the line of scrimmage. The ball can be thrown sideways or backwards at any time. This type of pass is known as a '''lateral''' and is much rarer in American football than in rugby league or rugby union, where a backwards pass is mandatory.
A play or down ends, and the ball becomes dead, after any of the following:
The player with the ball is forced to the ground or has his forward progress halted by members of the other team (as determined by an official).
A forward pass flies out of bounds or touches the ground before it is caught. This is known as an '''incomplete pass'''. The ball is returned to the original line of scrimmage for the next down.
The ball or the player with the ball goes beyond the dimensions of the field ('''out of bounds''').
A team scores.
A certain penalty is committed (such as false start) that causes the play to be blown dead and replayed.
Officials blow a whistle to notify all players that the play is over.
At all times, players and fans must be aware of the sequence of downs and the distance to a new first down. When a team has a first down, the scoreboard or television screen flashes "1st and 10" that is, first down and 10 yards to go. If the team gains three yards on the first play, for example, the next down will be "2nd and 7."
Changes of possession
The offense maintains possession of the ball unless one of the following things happens:
The team fails to get a first down, that is, move the ball forward at least 10 yards in four downs. The defensive team takes over the ball at the spot where the play ends. A change of possession in this manner is commonly called a '''turnover on downs'''.
The offense scores a touchdown or field goal. The team that scored then kicks off the ball to the other team. (See Scoring and Kickoffs below.)
The offense punts the ball to the defense. A '''punt''' is a kick in which a player drops the ball and kicks it before it hits the ground. Punts are nearly always made on fourth down, when the offensive team does not want to risk giving up the ball to the other team at its current spot on the field (through a failed attempt to make a first down) and feels it is too far from the other team's goal posts to kick a field goal.
A defensive player catches a forward pass. This is called an '''interception''', and the player who makes the interception can run with the ball until tackled, forced out of bounds, or scores. After the intercepting player is tackled or forced out of bounds, his team's offensive unit returns to the field and takes over at his last position.
An offensive player drops the ball (a '''fumble''') and a defensive player picks it up. As with interceptions, a player recovering a fumble can run with the ball until tackled or forced out of bounds. Lost fumbles and interceptions are together known as '''turnovers'''.
The offensive team misses a field goal attempt. The defensive team gets the ball at the spot where the previous play began (or, in the NFL, at the spot of the kick). If the unsuccessful kick was attempted from within 20 yards of the end zone, the other team gets the ball at its own 20 yard line (that is, 20 yards from the end zone).
An offensive player is tackled, forced out of bounds, or commits certain penalties in his own end zone. This rare occurrence is called a '''safety'''. (See ''Scoring'' below.)
Scoring
A team scores points by the following plays:
A '''touchdown''' (TD) is worth 6 points. A touchdown is scored when a player runs the ball into or catches a pass in his opponent's end zone.
After a touchdown, the scoring team attempts a '''conversion'''. The ball is placed at the other team's 3 yard line (the 2 yard line in the NFL). The team can attempt to kick it over the crossbar and through the goal posts in the manner of a field goal for 1 point (an '''extra point'''), or run or pass it into the end zone in the manner of a touchdown for 2 points (a '''two point conversion'''). In collegiate and professional leagues, the extra point is usually preferred its success rate is 94 in the NFL and 93.8 in the NCAA, compared to 43 in the NFL and 43.5 in the NCAA for two point conversions. If the defense forces a turnover on an attempted conversion and runs the ball back to their opponent's endzone, they are awarded with 2 points (does not apply in the NFL).
A '''field goal''' (FG) is worth 3 points, and it is scored by kicking the ball over the crossbar and through the goal posts. Field goals may be placekicked (kicked when the ball is held vertically against the ground by a teammate) or drop kicked. A field goal is usually attempted on fourth down instead of a punt when the ball is close to the goal line, or, when there is little or no time left to otherwise score.
A '''safety''' is worth 2 points. A safety is scored by the ''defense'' when the offensive player in possession of the ball is forced back into his own end zone and is tackled there, or fumbles the ball out of the end zone. Certain penalties by the offense occurring in the end zone also result in a safety.
Kickoffs and free kicks
Each half begins with a kickoff. Teams also kick off after scoring touchdowns and field goals. The ball is kicked from a kicking tee, which is made from one's own 30 yard line in the NFL and from the 35 yard line in college football. The other team's kick returner tries to catch the ball and advance it as far as possible. Where he is stopped is the point where the offense will begin its '''drive''', or series of offensive plays. If a kick returner does not want to run with the ball, he has the option to signal for a "fair catch" by waving his hands in the air before the catch. He will then be allowed to catch the ball and kneel it down on the field without being tackled. If the kick returner catches the ball in his own end zone, he can either run with the ball, or elect for a '''touchback''' by kneeling in the end zone. The receiving team can then start its offensive drive from its own 20 yard line. A touchback can also occur when the kick goes out of the end zone. Punts and turnovers in the end zone can also end in touchbacks. If a kickoff goes out of bounds over the sidelines without being interfered by the receiving team, the ball will be placed 30 yards from the spot of the kickoff (traditionally at the receiving team's 40 yard line in the NFL or the 35 yard line in college football).
After safeties, there is a '''free kick''' instead of a kickoff. A free kick is made from a team's own 20 yard line and can be punted or placekicked.
Penalties
Rule violations are punished with '''penalties'''. Most penalties result in moving the football either towards the endzone in the case of a defensive penalty, or away from the endzone in the case of an offensive penalty. Some defensive penalties give the offense an automatic first down. In addition, if a penalty gives the offensive team enough yardage to gain a first down, the first down is automatically given. If a penalty occurs during a play, an official throws a yellow flag near the spot of the foul. When the play is over, the team that did not commit the penalty has the option of taking either the penalty or the result of the play. For example, say a defensive player commits an offsides penalty on first down by passing the line of scrimmage before the snap, and the offense gains eight yards on the play. The team with the ball has the option of taking the penalty and repeat the first down with five yards to go, or declining the penalty and scrimmaging with 2nd and 2.
Some common penalties
'''False start''': A player on the offense, other than a back moving parallel to the line of scrimmage, moves just prior to the snap. Five yards.
'''Offsides''': A player is on the wrong side of the ball at the start of a play. Five yards. Similar fouls: Touching an opponent before the snap is '''encroachment''' lining up alongside the football instead of behind it is a '''neutral zone infraction'''.
'''Holding''': A blocker unfairly impedes a would be tackler or pass receiver, by grabbing the player's jersey, hooking, or tackling. When commited by the offense, or by either team on a change of possession, the penalty is ten yards. When committed by the defense, the penalty is five yards and an automatic first down is awarded to the offense. If the penalty occurred beyond the line of scrimmage, the penalty would be enforced from the spot of the foul.
'''Pass interference''': After a pass is launched into the air, a defender pushes, hooks, grabs, or knocks down a would be pass receiver, or if the receiver does the same to the defender to prevent an interception. First down at the spot of the foul if against the defense (15 yards from the previous spot in college football), or ten yards from the previous spot if against the offense. Similar penalties before a pass are called as '''holding''' or '''illegal contact'''.
'''Facemask''': a player places his hand on an opponent's facemask during a play. Five yards, or fifteen (a '''personal foul''') if the player hooks his fingers into the facemask or pulls on it.
'''Roughing the passer kicker''': A player places a hard hit on a passer long enough after a pass has been thrown to consider the contact avoidable, or places a hard hit on a punter or place kicker. Fifteen yards and automatic first down.
'''Running into the kicker''': A lighter contact on a kicker, especially after the kick has been made. Five yards.
'''Intentional grounding''': The passer throws a forward pass not near any eligible receiver, without first leaving the area behind where the blocking linemen were standing before the snap (the "pocket"), or the passer throws a forward pass outside of the pocket which does not reach the original '''line of scrimmage''' and is not near any eligible receiver. Ten yards plus loss of down, except if the penalty occurred in the end zone, then it is ruled a safety, and the defense is awarded 2 points. In college football and high school football, the defense is also credited with a quarterback sack. Note that spiking the ball to stop the clock is exempt from this.
'''Ineligible receiver downfield''': On every play the offense must have 7 players on the line of scrimmage, the player furthest from the ball on each side are eligible receivers the interior five players are considered ineligible to receive passes. This penalty is called if one of the 5 interior players is more than five yards past the line of scrimmage during a forward pass.
'''Dead ball personal foul''': After the play is blown dead, a player tackles or makes rough contact with a player on the other team. Fifteen yards, automatic first down if on defense.
'''Unnecessary roughness''': A catch all for rough play that doesn't merit its own foul. An example is an avoidable late hit on a ball carrier who has run out of bounds. Fifteen yards.
'''Unsportsmanlike conduct''': Another catch all call, commonly used for taunting, excessive celebration after a touchdown, and certain banned forms of pantomime (like slashing the throat). Fifteen yards.
The players
As noted above, most football players have highly specialized roles. At the college and NFL levels, most play only offense or only defense.
Offense
The '''offensive line''' consists of five players whose job is to protect the passer and clear the way for runners by blocking members of the defense. Except for the center, offensive linemen generally do not handle the ball.
The '''quarterback''' receives the ball on most plays. He then hands or tosses it to a running back, throws it to a receiver or runs with it himself.
'''Running backs''' line up behind or beside the QB and specialize in rushing with the ball. They also block, catch passes and, on rare occasions, pass the ball to others.
'''Wide receivers''' line up near the sidelines. They specialize in catching passes.
'''Tight ends''' line up outside the offensive line. They can either play like wide receivers (try to catch passes) or like offensive linemen (protect the QB or create spaces for runners).
Not all of these types of players will be in on every offensive play. Teams can vary the number of wide receivers, tight ends and running backs on the field at one time.
Defense
The '''defensive line''' consists of three to five players who line up across from the offensive line. They try to tackle the running backs before they can gain yardage or the quarterback before he can throw a pass.
At least three players line up as '''defensive backs'''. They cover the receivers and try to stop pass completions. They occasionally rush the quarterback.
The other players on the defense are known as '''linebackers'''. They line up between the defensive line and backs and may either rush the quarterback or cover potential receivers.
Special teams
The units of players who handle kicking plays are known as '''special teams'''. Special teams feature players that include the '''punter''', who handles punts, and the '''placekicker''' or '''kicker''', who kicks off and attempts field goals and extra points.
Basic football strategy
To many fans, the chief draw of football is the chess game that goes on between the two coaching staffs. Each team has a '''playbook''' of dozens to hundreds of plays. Plays are the directions for what the players should do on a down. Some plays are very safe they are very likely to get a few yards, but not much more than that. Other plays have the potential for long gains but a greater risk of a loss of yardage or a turnover.
Generally speaking, rushing plays are less risky than passing plays. However, there are relatively safe passing plays and risky running plays. To fool the other team, there are passing plays designed to look like running plays and vice versa. There are many trick or gadget plays, such as when a team lines up like it is going to kick and then tries to run or pass for a first down. Such high risk plays are a great thrill to the fans when they work. However, they can spell disaster if the opposing team realizes the deception and acts accordingly.
It has been said that football is the closest sport that strategically resembles real war, which may explain why it is by far the most popular sport in the American military. In fact, the United States Military Academy, the United States Naval Academy, and the United States Air Force Academy each field football teams that participate in Division I A of the NCAA. Army and Navy have a particularly historic rivalry.
A physical game
American football is a collision sport. To stop the offense from advancing the ball, the defense must tackle the player with the ball by knocking him down. As such, defensive players must use some form of physical contact to bring the ball carrier to the ground, within certain rules and guidelines. Tacklers cannot kick, punch or trip the runner. They also cannot grab the face mask of the runner's helmet, lead into a tackle with their own helmet, or lift the ball carrier up off his feet and drop him. Despite these and other rules regarding unnecessary roughness, most other forms of tackling are legal. Blockers and defenders trying to evade them also have wide leeway in trying to force their opponents out of the way. Quarterbacks are regularly hit by defenders coming on full speed from outside the quarterback's field of vision.
The high level of physical contact in football makes it more dangerous than other major American team sports. To compensate for this, players must wear a good deal of special protective equipment, such as a padded plastic helmet, shoulder pads, hip pads and knee pads. These protective "paddings" were introduced decades ago and improved ever since to help minimize lasting injury to players.
Despite protective equipment and rule changes to emphasize safety, injuries remain very common in football, due to its physical nature. Twenty five football players, mostly high schoolers, died from injuries directly related to football from 2000 2004, according to the National Center for Catastrophic Sport Injury Research. Concussions are common, with an estimated 62,000 suffered every year among high school players according to the Brain Injury Association of Arizona. . It is common to see injuries in the game, and deaths are not unheard of. The game is particularly risky when played by amateurs without proper gear, such as is common amongst Americans in backyards and parks across the country.
Some have criticized American football as a violent sport. American football is indeed quite physical in comparison to sports like basketball and soccer as well as other major American team sports. Tackle football is often banned in American schoolyards in favor of touch football, which uses two hand touching instead of tackling or flag football in which a player is "tackled" when an opponent pulls a flag off a belt attached to the player's waist. School physical education classes often use the "two hand touch" version of the game, leaving the tackles to the school's official after school sports program which can provide the appropriate gear and supervision.
The level of physical aggression and risk of injury has also made football less appealing to females, as they generally lack the muscle and body mass to compete without serious risk. The tackle nature of football also tends to favor the largest and strongest players, along with the fastest. The average weight of players in the NFL has increased in recent years.
All these factors have brought the sport into controversy in the past few decades, joining the group of other "violent" and thus controversial sports such as dodgeball, wrestling, hockey, and boxing. Critics argue that these sports emphasize size, physical strength, and brute force, and breed aggression and unhealthy competitive attitudes in children. Others argue that such sports teach sportsmanship and teamwork, and though contact sports are all violent to some degree, they always emphasize skill and strategy over mere belligerence.
Development of the game
Both American football and soccer have their origins in varieties of football played in the United Kingdom in the mid 19th century, and American football is directly descended from rugby football.
Rugby was first introduced to North America in Canada, brought by the British Army garrison in Montreal which played a series of games with McGill University. Both Canadian and American football evolved from this point. For an in depth overview of the differences and similarities of Canadian football and American football see: Comparison of Canadian and American football
American colleges spearheaded the growth of football. The was played between Rutgers and Princeton Universities on November 6, 1869. The game was won by Rutgers (6 4) although "The game, which bore little resemblance to its modern day counterpart, was played with two teams of 25 men each under rugby like rules, but like modern football, it was replete with surprise, strategy, prodigies of determination, and physical prowess, to use the words of one of the Rutgers players."
American football in its current form grew out of a series of three games between Harvard University and McGill University of Montreal in 1874. McGill played rugby football while Harvard played the Boston Game, which was closer to soccer. As often happened in those days of far from universal rules, the teams alternated rules so that both would have a fair chance. The Harvard players liked having the opportunity to run with the ball, and in 1875 persuaded Yale University to adopt rugby rules for their annual game. In 1876 Yale, Harvard, Princeton, and Columbia formed the Intercollegiate Football Association, which used the rugby code, except for a slight difference in scoring.
In 1880 Walter Camp introduced the scrimmage in place of the rugby scrum. In 1882 the system of downs was introduced to thwart Princeton's and Yale's strategy of controlling the ball without trying to score. In 1883 the number of players was reduced, at Camp's urging, to eleven, and Camp introduced the soon standard arrangement of a seven man offensive line with a quarterback, two halfbacks, and a fullback.
On September 3, 1895 the first professional football game was played, in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, between the Latrobe YMCA and the Jeannette Athletic Club. (Latrobe won the contest 12 0.).
By the 1890s interlocking offensive formations such as the flying wedge and the practice of teammates physically dragging ball carrying players forward had made the game extremely dangerous. Despite restrictions on the flying wedge and other precautions, in 1905 eighteen players were killed in games. President Theodore Roosevelt informed the universities that the game must be made safer. To force them to respond to his concerns, he threatened to pressure Congress to make playing football a federal crime.
In 1906, two rival organizing bodies, the Intercollegiate Rules Committee and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association, met in New York eventually they agreed on several new rules intended to make the game safer, among them the addition of a neutral zone between the scrimmage lines and a requirement that at least six players from each team line up on them. The most far reaching innovation they considered, though, was the legalization of the forward pass. This was very controversial at the time, much derided by purists. As an alternative means of opening out the play, Walter Camp would have preferred widening the field but representatives from Harvard pointed to recently constructed Harvard Stadium, which could not be widened, and the forward pass was adopted it has come to shape the whole history of American football, as opposed to its cousins around the world.
In 1910, after further deaths, interlocking formations were finally outlawed and in 1912 the field was changed to its current size, the value of a touchdown increased to 6 points, and a fourth down added to each possession. The game had achieved its modern form.
Problems in football
Injuries are more common in American football than in many other sports, although rule changes made in the past 90 years (for instance, the elimination of "horse collar tackles") have gradually lowered the rates of injuries. In addition, protective equipment has become better for example, the optional leather helmets introduced during the 1890s have been replaced (in several stages) by required high tech padded plastic helmets with bars protecting the face.
More recently, the use of steroids and the extent thereof has become an object of debate in professional, college, and even high school football leagues.
Another problem with football is that it is an expensive sport. The specialized helmets, uniforms, and pads can cost hundreds of dollars. There is a widespread perception that football teams based in schools and public recreational leagues consume far more than their fair share of the sports budget, although sales of tickets to college (and to some extent high school) football games often make it a revenue producing sport.
in Cleveland, Ohio, home of the Cleveland Browns.
Professional, college, and other leagues
Football is played at a number of levels in the United States. These include the following:
National Football League (NFL) the top level men's professional league
NFL Europe semi professional league in Europe
College football played at many U.S. colleges
American Football Association National organization for the advancement and promotion of semi pro minor league football teams and leagues in the United States.
North American Football League Amateur minor league with more than 100 member organizations since 1996
Women's American football since 2000, there has been a surge of women's professional leagues.
High school football played at most U.S. High Schools
Pop Warner or youth football involves younger children who are too young to play high school, generally in middle school.
Sprint football players must weigh no more than 172 pounds
American football is also played in many nations around the world. Some of the organizations leagues that play American football are:
Mexican College Football League or ONEFA played by many Mexican colleges, with essentially NCAA rules
British Collegiate American Football League (BCAFL) Fast growing college football league in the UK
British American Football League (BAFL) Higher League of American Football in the UK
European Federation of American Football (www.efaf.info) European organization that crowns its champion in the Euro Bowl
German Football League
Gridiron Australia national body of several state level leagues
International Federation of American Football International governing body for American football with 39 member associations from North America, Europe, Asia and Oceania. The IFAF also overseas the World Championship of American Football.
Okinawan Football League Various football teams made up of U.S. servicemembers and one from Ryuku University
Other kinds of football with quite different rules:
Canadian Football League (CFL) men's professional league based in Canada, played using different rules known as Canadian football
Arena Football League mid level men's professional league. Played in indoor stadiums, hence the name "arena" football. One of the nation's fastest growing sports.
Nine man football, Eight man football, and Six man football variations of high school football, usually played in sparsely populated areas
Amateur and youth league football
Flag football and Touch football non tackle almost exclusively amateur
The descriptions in this article are based primarily on the current rules of the National Football League (NFL, 1920 present). Differences with college rules will be noted. Professional, college, high school, and amateur rules are similar.
Professional leagues that no longer exist:
World Football League (WFL, 1974 75)
United States Football League (USFL, 1983 1985)
XFL (XFL, 2001)
All America Football Conference (AAFC, 1946 1949) (2 teams are now in the NFL)
World League of American Football (WLAF, 1991 1993 now NFL Europe),
American Football Leagues (AFL), four separate ones: I:1926, II: 1937 38, III: 1940 1941 and IV: 1960 1969). The fourth AFL (1960 1969) merged with the NFL in 1970 and now exists (mostly) as the AFC with several new teams. The old NFL appeared as the NFC.
Fore more information: List of leagues of American football
References
cite web
url http: www.nfl.com fans
title Digest of Rules
publisher National Football League
accessdate December 28
accessyear 2005
cite web
url http: www.nfl.com history
title History and the basics
publisher National Football League
accessdate December 28
accessyear 2005
cite web
url http: www.thesportjournal.org 2005Journal Vol8 No4 starkey.asp
title Playing with the Percentages When Trailing by Two Touchdowns
publisher Montana State University
accessdate December 24
accessyear 2005
See also
American football strategy
National Women's Football Association
Canadian Football League
German Football League
American football glossary
List of American football players
Pro Football Hall of Fame
List of defunct sports leagues
Fantasy Football
Gridiron football
External links
The the top professional league
NCAA (complete college football rules are available as a PDF file)
Resource for coaches players.
Category:Team sports
bg:
ca:Futbol americ
cs:Americk fotbal
da:Amerikansk fodbold
de:American Football
es:F tbol americano
eo:Usona piedpilko
fr:Football am ricain
ko:
it:Football americano
he:
lv:Amerik u futbols
nl:American football
ja:
no:Amerikansk fotball
pl:Futbol ameryka ski
pt:Futebol americano
sh:Ameri ki fudbal
simple:American football
sk:Americk futbal
sr:
fi:Amerikkalainen jalkapallo
sv:Amerikansk fotboll
th:
zh:
Warbox
conflict American Revolutionary War
campaign
image
caption
date 1775 1783
place North America
result Treaty of Paris (1783)
combatant1 American Revolutionaries, France, Netherlands, Spain, allies
combatant2 British Empire, allies
commander1 George WashingtonbrComtedeRochambeaubrNathanael Greene
commander2 William HowebrHenry ClintonbrCharlesCornwallis
The '''American Revolutionary War''' (1775 1783), also known as the '''American War of Independence''', was the military component of the American Revolution. It was fought primarily between Great Britain and revolutionaries within thirteen British colonies in North America, who proclaimed themselves as the United States of America early in the war. The war began largely as a colonial revolt against the economic policies of the British Empire, and eventually widened far beyond British North America, with France, Spain, and the Netherlands entering the war against Great Britain. Additionally, many Native Americans fought on both sides of the conflict.
Throughout the war, the British were able to use their naval superiority to capture and occupy coastal cities, but control of the countryside (where most of the population lived) largely eluded them. French involvement proved decisive, with a naval victory in the Chesapeake leading to the surrender of a British army at the Battle of Yorktown in 1781. The Treaty of Paris in 1783 recognized the independence of the United States of America.
The terms ''American Revolutionary War'' and ''American Revolution'' are often used interchangeably, though the American Revolution included political and social developments before and after the war itself. This article refers solely to the military campaign for a broader perspective, including the origins and aftermath of the war, see the article on the American Revolution.
Combatants
Choosing sides
Colonists were divided over which side to support in the war in some areas, the struggle was a civil war. The Revolutionaries (also known as Americans or Patriots) had the support of about 40 to 45 percent of the colonial population. About 15 to 20 percent of the population supported the British Crown during the war, and were known as Loyalists (or Tories). Loyalists fielded perhaps 50,000 men during the war years in support of the British Empire. After the war, some 70,000 Loyalists departed, most going to Canada, Great Britain, or to British colonies in the Caribbean.
When the war began, the Americans did not have a professional army (also known as a "standing army"). Each colony had traditionally provided for its own defenses through the use of local militia. Militiamen served for only a few weeks or months at a time, were generally reluctant to go very far from home, and would often come and go as they saw fit. Militia typically lacked the training and discipline of regular troops, but could be effective when an emergency energized them.
Seeking to coordinate military efforts, the Continental Congress established (on paper) a regular army the Continental Army in June 1775, and appointed George Washington as commander in chief. The development of the Continental Army was always a work in progress, and Washington reluctantly augmented the regular troops with militia throughout the war. Although as many as 250,000 men may have served as regulars or as militiamen for the Revolutionary cause in the eight years of the war, there were never more than 90,000 total men under arms for the Americans in any given year. Armies in North America were small by European standards of the era the greatest number of men that Washington personally commanded in the field at any one time was fewer than 17,000.
European nations
Early in 1775, the British army consisted of about 36,000 men worldwide, but wartime recruitment steadily increased this number. Additionally, over the course of the war the British hired about 30,000 German mercenaries, popularly known in the colonies as "Hessians" because many of them came from Hesse Kassel. Germans would make up about one third of the British troop strength in North America. By 1779, the number of British and German troops stationed in North America was over 60,000, though these were spread from Canada to Florida.
France, the Netherlands and Spain entered the war against Great Britain in an attempt to dilute Britain's emerging superpower status. Early on, all three countries quietly provided financial assistance to the American rebels. France officially entered the war in 1778 and soon sent troops, ships, and military equipment to fight against the British for the remainder of the war. Spain entered the war in 1779, officially as an ally of France but not the United StatesSpain was not keen on encouraging similar rebellions in her own empire. The Netherlands entered the war late in 1780, but was soon overwhelmed by the British.
Blacks and Native Americans
African Americans, slaves and free blacks, served on both sides during the war. Black soldiers served in northern militias from the outset, but this was forbidden in the South, where slaveowners feared arming slaves. Lord Dunmore, the Royal Governor of Virginia, issued an emancipation proclamation in November 1775, promising freedom to runaway slaves who fought for the British Sir Henry Clinton issued a similar edict in New York in 1779. Tens of thousands of slaves escaped to the British lines, although possibly as few as 1,000 served under arms. Many of the rest served as orderlies, mechanics, laborers, servants, scouts and guides, although more than half died in smallpox epidemics that swept the British forces, and a number were driven out of the British lines when food ran low. Despite Dunmore's promises, the majority were not given their freedom.
In response, and because of manpower shortages, Washington lifted the ban on black enlistment in the Continental Army in January 1776. All black units were formed in Rhode Island and Massachusetts many were slaves promised freedom for serving in lieu of their masters. Another all black unit came from Haiti with French forces. At least 5,000 black soldiers fought for the Patriot cause.
Most American Indian communities east of the Mississippi River were affected by the war, many divided over the question of which side to support. Most Native Americans who joined the fight fought against the United States, since native lands were threatened by expanding American settlement. An estimated 13,000 warriors fought on the British side the largest group, the Iroquois Confederacy, fielded about 1,500 warriors against the Americans.
War in the North
Massachusetts, 1774 to 1776
In 1774, the British parliament effectively abolished the provincial government of Massachusetts. Lieutenant General Thomas Gage, already the commander in chief of British troops in North America, was also appointed governor of Massachusetts and was instructed by King George's government to enforce royal authority in the troublesome colony. However, popular resistance compelled the newly appointed royal officials in Massachusetts to resign or to seek refuge in Boston. Gage commanded four regiments of British regulars (about 4,000 men) from his headquarters in Boston, but the countryside was in the hands of the Revolutionaries.
On the night of April 18 1775, General Gage sent 900 men to seize munitions stored by the colonial militia at Concord, Massachusetts. Several riders including Paul Revere alerted the countryside, and when the British troops entered Lexington on the morning of April 19, they found 75 minutemen formed up on the village common. Shots were exchanged, and the British moved on to Concord, where there was more fighting. By the time the "redcoats" (as the British soldiers were called) began the return march, several thousand militiamen had gathered along the road. A running fight ensued, and the British detachment suffered heavily. With the Battle of Lexington and Concord the "shot heard 'round the world" the war had begun.
Afterwards, thousands of militiamen converged on Boston, bottling up the British in the city. Late in May, Gage received by sea about 4,500 reinforcements and a trio of generals who would play a vital role in the war: William Howe, John Burgoyne, and Henry Clinton. They formulated a plan to break out of the city.
On June 17, 1775, British forces under General Howe seized the Charleston peninsula at the Battle of Bunker Hill. The battle was technically a British victory, but losses were so heavy that the attack was not followed up. Thus the siege was not broken, and General Gage was soon replaced by General Howe as the British commander in chief.
In July 1775, newly appointed General Washington arrived outside Boston to take charge of the colonial forces. The standoff continued throughout the fall and winter. In early March 1776, heavy cannons that had been captured by the Revolutionaries at Fort Ticonderoga were moved to Boston, a difficult feat engineered by Henry Knox. When the guns were placed on Dorchester Heights, overlooking the British positions, Howe's situation became untenable. The British evacuated the city on March 17, 1776 and sailed for temporary refuge in Halifax, Nova Scotia. The local militia dispersed and, in April, Washington took most of the Continental Army to fortify New York City.
Canada, 1775 to 1776
During the long standoff at Boston, the Continental Congress sought a way to seize the initiative elsewhere. Congress had initially invited French Canadians to join them as the fourteenth colony, but when that failed to happen, an invasion of Canada was authorized in an attempt to drive the British from the primarily francophone colony of Quebec (comprising present day Quebec and Ontario). Two expeditions were undertaken. On September 16, 1775, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery marched north from Fort Ticonderoga with about 1,700 militiamen, capturing Montreal on November 13. General Guy Carleton, the governor of Canada, escaped to Quebec City.
The second expedition, led by Colonel Benedict Arnold, set out from Fort Western (present day Maine) on September 25. The expedition was a logistical nightmare, and many men succumbed to smallpox. By the time Arnold reached Quebec City in early November, he had but 600 of his original 1,100 men. Nevertheless, Arnold demanded the surrender of the city, to no avail. Montgomery joined Arnold, and they attacked Quebec City on December 31, but were soundly defeated by Carleton. Montgomery was killed, Arnold was wounded, and many men were taken prisoner. The Americans held on outside Quebec City until the spring of 1776, and then withdrew.
Another attempt was made by the Revolutionaries to push back towards Quebec, but failed at Trois Rivi res on June 8, 1776. Carleton then launched his own invasion, and defeated Arnold in the Battle of Valcour Island in October. Arnold fell back to Fort Ticonderoga, where the invasion of Canada had begun. The invasion of Canada ended as an embarrassing disaster for the Revolutionaries, but Arnold's improvised navy on Lake Champlain delayed the fateful British counter thrust (the Saratoga Campaign) until 1777.
New York and New Jersey, 1776 to 1777
Having withdrawn from Boston, the British now focused on capturing New York City. General Howe, with the services of his brother, Admiral Lord Howe, began amassing troops on Staten Island in July 1776. General Washington, with a smaller army of about 20,000 men, unwittingly violated a cardinal rule of warfare, and divided his troops about equally between Long Island and Manhattan, thus allowing the Howes to engage only one half of the Continental Army at a time.
In late August, the Howes transported about 22,000 men (including 9,000 "Hessians") to Long Island. In the Battle of Long Island on August 27, 1776, the British expertly executed a surprise flanking maneuver, driving the Revolutionaries back to the Brooklyn Heights fortifications. General Howe then laid siege to the works, but Washington skillfully managed a nighttime evacuation to Manhattan.
Having taken Long Island, the Howes moved to seize Manhattan. On September 15, General Howe landed about 12,000 men on lower Manhattan, quickly taking control of New York City. The Revolutionaries withdrew to Harlem Heights, where they skirmished the next day, but held their ground.
When Howe moved to encircle Washington's army in October, the Revolutionaries again fell back, and a battle at White Plains was fought on October 28, 1776. Once more Washington retreated, but Howe, instead of aggressively pursuing the withdrawal, returned to Manhattan and captured Fort Washington in mid November, taking almost 3,000 prisoners. Four days later, Fort Lee, across the Hudson River from Fort Washington, was also taken.
's 1851 painting ''Washington Crossing the Delaware'' is an iconic image of American history.
General Lord Cornwallis continued to chase Washington's army through New Jersey, until the Revolutionaries withdrew across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania in early December. With the campaign at an apparent conclusion for the season, the British entered winter quarters. Although Howe had missed several opportunities to crush the diminishing rebel army, he had killed or captured over 5,000 Americans. He controlled much of New York and New Jersey, and was in a good position to resume operations in the spring, with the rebel capital of Philadelphia in striking distance.
The outlook of the Continental Army and thus the revolution itself was bleak. "These are the times that try men's souls," wrote Thomas Paine, who was with the army on the retreat. The army had dwindled to fewer than 5,000 men fit for duty, and would be reduced to 1,400 after enlistments expired at the end of the year. Spirits were low, popular support was wavering, and Congress had abandoned Philadelphia in despair.
Washington reacted by taking the offensive, stealthily crossing the Delaware on Christmas night and capturing nearly 1,000 Hessians at the Battle of Trenton on December 26, 1776. Cornwallis marched to retake Trenton, but was outmaneuvered by Washington, who successfully attacked the British rearguard at Princeton on January 3, 1777. Washington then entered winter quarters at Morristown, New Jersey, having retaken much of New Jersey, and having secured two bold, morale boosting victories in quick succession to reinvigorate the flagging revolution.
Saratoga Campaign, 1777
In the summer of 1777, the British launched a new expedition from Canada. Led by General Burgoyne, the intention was to seize the Lake Champlain and Hudson River corridor, effectively isolating New England from the rest of the American colonies. Burgoyne's invasion had two components: he would lead about 10,000 men along Lake Champlain towards Albany, New York, while a second column of about 2,000 men, led by Barry St. Leger, would move down the Mohawk River valley and link up with Burgoyne in Albany.
Burgoyne set off in early July, recapturing Fort Ticonderoga from the retreating Revolutionaries without firing a shot. He then proceeded overland towards Albany, but Revolutionaries slowed his progress through the wilderness by destroying bridges and felling trees in his path. Running short on supplies, in August Burgoyne sent a detachment to raid nearby Bennington, Vermont. The raiders were decisively defeated by local militia, depriving Burgoyne of nearly 1,000 men and the much needed supplies.
leader Joseph Brant commanded both American Indians and white Loyalists during the American Revolutionary War.
Meanwhile, St. Leger half of his force American Indians led by Joseph Brant had laid siege to Fort Stanwix on the Mohawk River. About 800 Revolutionary militiamen and their Indian allies marched to relieve the siege, but were ambushed and scattered by British and Indians on August 6 at the Battle of Oriskany. Iroquois warriors fought on both sides of the battle, marking the beginning of a civil war within the Six Nations. When a second relief expedition approached, this time led by Benedict Arnold, the siege was lifted, and St. Leger's expedition returned to Canada. Burgoyne was on his own.
Burgoyne pushed on towards Albany, his forces now reduced to about 6,000 men. A Revolutionary army of about 8,000 men, commanded by the newly arrived General Horatio Gates, had entrenched about 10 miles (16 km) south of Saratoga, New York. Burgoyne sent 2,000 men to outflank the Revolutionary position, but was checked by Generals Benedict Arnold and Daniel Morgan in the first battle of Saratoga on September 19, 1777. After the battle, the two armies dug in.
Burgoyne was in trouble now, but he hoped that help from the south might be on the way. All along, Burgoyne had suggested that his invasion from Canada might be supported by a British offensive up the Hudson River from Howe's location in New York City. However, British war planners did not coordinate their efforts. General Howe had instead sailed away from New York on an expedition to capture Philadelphia (see next section). British General Henry Clinton, left in command at New York, did indeed sail up the Hudson in October, capturing several forts and burning Kingston (then the rebel capital of New York), but his efforts were not enough to affect the events at Saratoga.
Revolutionary militiamen, many of them outraged by the reported murder of an American woman at the hands of Burgoyne's Indian allies, flocked to Gates's army, swelling his force to 11,000 by the beginning of October. Burgoyne, his position becoming desperate, launched a new offensive, the second battle of Saratoga on October 7. The attack was repelled, and General Arnold, though relieved of command by Gates, rushed to the battle and led a decisive counterattack. Badly beaten, Burgoyne surrendered on October 17.
Saratoga is often regarded as the turning point of the war. Revolutionary confidence and determination, suffering from Howe's successful occupation of Philadelphia, was renewed. Even more importantly, the victory encouraged France to enter the war against Great Britain. Spain and the Netherlands soon did the same. For the British, the war had now become much more complicated.
Philadelphia campaign, 1777 to 1778
Having secured New York City in his 1776 campaign, in 1777 General Howe concentrated on capturing Philadelphia, the seat of the Revolutionary government. He moved slowly, landing 15,000 troops in late August at the northern end of Chesapeake Bay, about 55 miles (90 km) southwest of Philadelphia. Washington positioned his 11,000 men between Howe and Philadelphia, but was outflanked and driven back at the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777. The Continental Congress once again abandoned the city. British and Revolutionary forces maneuvered around each other for the next several days, clashing in minor encounters such as the so called "Paoli Massacre." On September 26, Howe finally outmaneuvered Washington and marched into Philadelphia unopposed.
After taking the city, the British garrisoned about 9,000 troops in Germantown, five miles (8 km) above Philadelphia. Washington unsuccessfully attacked Germantown in early October, and then retreated to watch and wait. Meanwhile, the British secured the Delaware River by taking (with difficulty) forts Mifflin and Mercer in November.
General Washington's problems at this time were not just with the British. In the so called Conway Cabal, some politicians and officers unhappy with Washington's recent performance as commander in chief secretively discussed his removal. Washington, offended by the behind the scenes maneuvering, laid the whole matter openly before Congress. His supporters rallied behind him, and the episode abated.
Washington and his army encamped at Valley Forge in December 1777, about 20 miles (32 km) from Philadelphia, where they would stay for the next six months. Over the winter, 2,500 men (out of 10,000) died from disease and exposure. However, the army eventually emerged from Valley Forge in good order, thanks in part to a training program supervised by Baron von Steuben.
Meanwhile, there was a shakeup in the British command, with General Clinton replacing Howe as commander in chief. French entry into the war had changed British war strategy, and Clinton was ordered by the government to abandon Philadelphia and defend New York City, now vulnerable to French naval power.
Washington's army shadowed Clinton on his withdrawal, and forced a battle at Monmouth on June 28, 1778, the last major battle in the North. Washington's second in command, General Charles Lee, ordered a controversial retreat during the battle, allowing Clinton's army to escape. By July, Clinton was in New York City, and Washington was again at White Plains. Both armies were back where they had been two years earlier. With the exception of scattered minor actions in the North, like the Battle of Stony Point, the focus of the war now shifted elsewhere.
War in the West
''Main article: Frontier warfare during the American Revolution''
's 180 mile (290 km) trek in the dead of winter led to the capture of General Henry Hamilton, Lieutenant Governor of Canada.
West of the Appalachian Mountains, the American Revolutionary War was an "Indian War." The British and the Continental Congress both courted American Indians as allies (or urged them to remain neutral), and many Native American communities became divided over what path to take. Like the Iroquois Confederacy, tribes such as the Cherokees and the Shawnees split into factions. Delawares under White Eyes signed the first American Indian treaty with the United States, but other Delawares joined the British.
The British supplied their Indian allies from forts along the Great Lakes, and tribesmen staged raids on Revolutionary settlements in New York, Kentucky, Pennsylvania and elsewhere. Joint Iroquois Loyalist attacks in the Wyoming Valley and at Cherry Valley in 1778 helped provoke the scorched earth Sullivan Expedition into western New York during the summer of 1779. On the western front, every man, woman, and child regardless of race was a potential casualty.
In the Ohio Country, the Virginia frontiersman George Rogers Clark attempted to neutralize British influence among the Ohio tribes by capturing the outposts of Kaskaskia and Vincennes in the summer of 1778. When General Henry Hamilton, the British commander at Detroit, retook Vincennes, Clark returned in a surprise march in February 1779 and captured Hamilton himself.
However, a decisive victory in the West eluded the United States even as their fortunes had risen in the East. The low point on the frontier came in 1782 with the Gnadenhutten massacre, when Pennsylvania militiamen unable to track down enemy warriors executed nearly 100 Christian Delaware noncombatants, mostly women and children. Later that year, in the last major encounter of the war, a party of Kentuckians was soundly defeated by a superior force of British regulars and Native Americans.
War in the South
During the first three years of the American Revolutionary War, the primary military encounters were in the North. One notable exception was in June 1776, when General Henry Clinton sailed south to attack Charleston, South Carolina. This ended in humiliating defeat for the British, and the Patriots remained in control of the southern states for the next three years. Starting in 1778, the British once again turned their attention to Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Virginia, where they hoped to regain control by recruiting thousands of Loyalists.
On December 29, 1778, an expeditionary corps of 3,500 men from Clinton's army in New York captured Savannah, Georgia. An attempt by French and Revolutionary forces to retake Savannah failed on October 9, 1779. In this assault, Count Casimir Pulaski, the Polish commander of American Revolutionary cavalry, was mortally wounded. With Savannah secured, Clinton could now launch a new assault on Charleston, South Carolina, where he had failed in 1776.
Carolinas, 1780 to 1781
was perhaps the best cavalry commander in the war and the most hated man in the South. This portrait was painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1782.
Clinton finally moved against Charleston in 1780, blockading the harbor in March, and building up about 10,000 troops in the area. Inside the city, General Benjamin Lincoln commanded about 2,650 Continentals and 2,500 militiamen. When British Colonel Banastre Tarleton cut off the city's supply lines in victories at Monck's Corner in April and Lenud's Ferry in early May, Charleston was surrounded.
On May 12, 1780, General Lincoln surrendered his 5,000 men the largest surrender of U.S. troops until the American Civil War. With relatively few casualties, Clinton had seized the South s biggest city and seaport, winning perhaps the greatest British victory of the war, and paving the way for what seemed like certain conquest of the South.
The remnants of the southern Continental Army began to withdraw to North Carolina, but were pursued by Colonel Tarleton, who defeated them at the Battle of Waxhaws on May 29, 1780. Among the Americans , a story spread that Tarleton had massacred many Americans after they had surrendered (the truth of this charge is still debated). Bloody Tarleton became a hated name, and Tarleton s quarter referring to his reputed lack of mercy (or quarter ) soon became a rallying cry.
With these events, organized American military activity in the South had collapsed. The states however carried on their functions, and the war was carried on by partisans such as Francis Marion. General Clinton turned over British operations in the South to Lord Cornwallis. The Continental Congress dispatched General Horatio Gates, to the rescue with a new army. But Gates promptly suffered one of the worst defeats in U.S. military history at the Battle of Camden on August 16, 1780, setting the stage for Cornwallis to invade North Carolina.
The tables were quickly turned on Cornwallis, however. One wing of his army was utterly defeated at the Battle of Kings Mountain on October 7, 1780, delaying his move into North Carolina. Kings Mountain was noteworthy because it was not a battle between British redcoats and colonial troops: it was a battle between American Loyalists and American Patriots. The British plan to raise large Loyalist armies failed not enough Loyalists enlisted, and those who did were at risk once the British army moved on. Only in Georgia did the Crown manage to create a counter revolutionary civil government.
Gates was replaced by George Washington's most dependable subordinate, General Nathanael Greene. Greene assigned about 1,000 men to General Daniel Morgan, a superb tactician who crushed Tarleton s troops at the Battle of Cowpens on January 17, 1781. Greene proceeded to wear down his opponents in a series of battles (Guilford Court House, Hobkirk's Hill, Ninety Six, and Eutaw Springs), each of them tactically a victory for the British, but giving no strategic advantage to the victors. Greene summed up his approach in a motto that would become famous: "We fight, get beat, rise, and fight again." Unable to capture or destroy Greene's army, Cornwallis moved north to to Virginia.
Virginia, 1775 to 1781
Virginia had been under revolutionary control since Loyalist forces (including runaway slaves) under Governor Dunmore had been defeated at the Battle of Great Bridge on December 9, 1775. After the defeat, Dunmore and his troops took refuge on British ships off of Norfolk, which Dunmore bombarded and burned on January 1, 1776. He was driven from an island in Chesapeake Bay that summer, never to return.
British forces raided Virginia sporadically during the war. In January 1781, the rebel capital of Richmond was put to the torch by none other than Benedict Arnold, now a turncoat, who had sold his services to the other side and was now a British general.
In March 1781, General Washington dispatched Lafayette to defend Virginia. The young Frenchman had 3,200 men at his command, but British troops in the state, now reinforced and commanded by Cornwallis, totaled 7,200. Lafayette skirmished with Cornwallis, avoiding a decisive battle while gathering reinforcements. "The boy cannot escape me," Cornwallis is supposed to have said. However, Cornwallis was unable to trap Lafayette, and so he moved his forces to Yorktown, Virginia in July in order to link up with the British navy.
War at sea
''Main article: Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War''
Meanwhile the co operation of the French became active. In July Count Rochambeau arrived at Newport, Rhode Island. That place had been occupied by the British from 1776 to the close of 1779. An unsuccessful attempt was made to drive them out in 1778 by the Revolutionaries assisted by the French admiral d'Estaing and a French corps.
First Battle of Ushant July 27, 1778
John Paul Jones
Continental Navy
Battle of Cape St. Vincent (1780)
Second Battle of Ushant December 12, 1781
Gulf Coast
After Spain declared war against Great Britain in June of 1779, Count Bernardo de G lvez, the Spanish governor of Louisiana, seized three British Mississippi River outposts: Manchac, Baton Rouge, and Natchez. G lvez then captured Mobile on March 14, 1780, and, in May of 1781, forced the surrender of the British outpost at Pensacola, Florida. On May 8, 1782, G lvez captured the British naval base at New Providence in the Bahamas. Galvez also supplied soldiers to George Rogers Clark and had been supplying substantial quantities of war supplies to the American rebels from as early as 1777.
Caribbean
The Battle of the Saintes took place in 1782, during the American War of Independence, and was a victory of a British fleet under Admiral Sir George Rodney over a French fleet under the Comte de Grasse. The defeat dashed the hopes of France and Spain to take Jamaica and other colonies from the British.
India
The Franco British war spilled over into India in 1780, in the form of the Second Anglo Mysore War. The two chief combatants were Tipu Sultan, ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore and a key French ally, and the British government of Madras. The Anglo Mysore conflict was bloody but inconclusive, and ended in a draw at the Treaty of Mangalore in 1784.
Netherlands
Also in 1780, the British struck against the United Provinces of the Netherlands in the Fourth Anglo Dutch War to preempt Dutch involvement in the League of Armed Neutrality, directed primarily against the British Navy during the war. Agitation by Dutch radicals and a friendly attitude towards the United States by the Dutch government, both influenced by the American Revolution, also encouraged the British to attack.
The war lasted into 1784 and was disastrous to the Dutch mercantile economy.
Mediterranean
On February 5, 1782, Spanish and French forces captured Minorca, which had been under British control since the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. A further Franco Spanish effort to recover Gibraltar was unsuccessful. Minorca was ceded to Spain in the peace treaty.
Whitehaven
An interesting footnote to this war was the actual landing on Britain itself of a ship from the U.S. Navy. This occurred in 1778 when the port of Whitehaven in Cumberland was raided by John Paul Jones. The landing was a surprise attack, taken as an action of revenge by Jones, and was never intended as an invasion. Nevertheless, it caused hysteria in England, with the attack showing a weakness that could be exploited by other states such as France or Spain. Its result was an intense period of fortification in British ports.
War's end
The northern, southern, and naval theaters of the war converged at Yorktown in 1781. On September 5, 1781, French naval forces defeated the British Royal Navy at the Battle of the Chesapeake, cutting off Cornwallis's supplies and transport. Washington hurriedly moved his troops from New York, and a combined Franco American force of 17,000 troops commenced the Battle of Yorktown on October 6, 1781. Cornwallis's position quickly became untenable, and on October 19 his army surrendered. The war was all but over.
, 1797). On the right is the American flag, on the left is the French flag (white flag of the monarchy). Despite the painting's title, Cornwallis (claiming illness) was not present and is not depicted. Washington is on horseback in the right background because the British commander was absent, military protocol dictated that Washington have a subordinate in this case Benjamin Lincoln accept the surrender.
British Prime Minister Lord North resigned soon after hearing the news from Yorktown. In April 1782, the British House of Commons voted to end the war in America. On November 30, 1782 preliminary peace articles were signed in Paris the formal end of the war did not occur until the Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783 and the United States Congress ratified the treaty on January 14, 1784. The last British troops left New York City on November 25, 1783.
The reasons for Great Britain's misfortunes and defeat may be summarized as follows: Misconception by the home government of the temper and reserve strength of her colonists disbelief at the outset in the probability of a protracted struggle covering the immense territory in America consequent failure of the British to use their more efficient military strength effectively the safe and Fabian generalship of Washington and perhaps most significantly, the French alliance and European combinations by which at the close of the conflict left Great Britain without a friend or ally on the continent.
Decisive victory eluded the United States on the western frontier. Great Britain negotiated the Paris peace treaty without consulting her Indian allies, however, and ceded much American Indian territory to the United States. Full of resentment, Native Americans reluctantly confirmed these land cessions with the United States in a series of treaties, but the result was essentially an armed truce the fighting would be renewed in conflicts along the frontier, the largest being the Northwest Indian War.
Casualties
The total loss of life resulting from the American Revolutionary War is unknown. As was typical in the wars of the era, disease claimed more lives than battle. The war took place in the context of a massive smallpox epidemic in North America that probably killed more than 130,000 people. Historian Joseph J. Ellis suggests that Washington's decision to have his troops inoculated may have been the commander in chief's most important strategic decision.
Casualty figures for the American Revolutionaries have varied over the years a recent scholarly estimate lists 6,824 killed and 8,445 wounded in action. The number of Revolutionary troop deaths from disease and other non combat causes is estimated at about 18,500.
Approximately 1,200 Germans were killed in action and 6,354 died from illness or accident. About 16,000 of the remaining German troops returned home, but roughly 5,500 remained in the United States after the war for various reasons, many becoming American citizens. No reliable statistics exist for the number of casualties among other groups, including American Loyalists, British regulars, American Indians, French and Spanish troops, and civilians.
See also
List of important people in the era of the American Revolution
Battles of the American Revolutionary War
Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War
American Revolution prisoners of war
British prison ships (New York)
France in the American Revolutionary War
Spain in the American Revolutionary War
The Netherlands in the American Revolutionary War
The Society of the Cincinnati
Daughters of the American Revolution
Timeline of United States revolutionary history (1760 1789)
Newburgh conspiracy
List of British Forces in the American Revolutionary War
List of Continental Forces in the American Revolutionary War
Last surviving United States war veterans
South Carolina during the American Revolution
New Jersey during the American Revolution
Evacuation Day (New York)
Notes
div style "font size: 85 "
Percentage of Loyalists and Revolutionaries: Robert M. Calhoon, "Loyalism and Neutrality" in ''The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution'', p. 247 number of Loyalist troops: Boatner, p. 663.
Size of Revolutionary armies: Boatner, p. 264.
British troop strength: Black, pp. 27 29. Number of Germans hired: Boatner, pp. 424 26.
British usage of escaped slaves: Kaplan Kaplan, pp. 71 89.
Revolutionary all black units: Kaplan Kaplan, pp. 64 69.
Total number of warriors: James H. Merrell, "Indians and the new republic" in ''The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution'', p. 393. Number of Iroquois warriors: Boatner, p. 545.
Smallpox epidemic: Fenn, p. 275. A great number of these smallpox deaths occurred outside the theater of war in Mexico or among American Indians west of the Mississippi River. Washington and inoculation: Ellis, p. 87.
Revolutionary dead and wounded: Chambers, p. 849.
div
References
Black, Jeremy. ''War for America: The Fight for Independence, 1775 1783''. St. Martin's Press (New York) and Sutton Publishing (UK), 1991. ISBN 0312067135 (1991), ISBN 0312123469 (1994 paperback), ISBN 0750928085 (2001 paperpack).
Boatner, Mark Mayo, III. ''Encyclopedia of the American Revolution.'' New York: McKay, 1966 revised 1974. ISBN 0811705781.
Chambers, John Whiteclay II, ed. in chief. ''The Oxford Companion to American Military History''. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0195071980.
Ellis, Joseph J. ''His Excellency: George Washington''. New York: Knopf, 2004. ISBN 1400040310.
Fenn, Elizabeth Anne. ''Pox Americana: The Great Smallpox Epidemic of 1775 82''. New York: Hill and Wang, 2001. ISBN 0809078201.
Greene, Jack P. and J.R. Pole, eds. ''The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution''. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 1991 reprint 1999. ISBN 1557865477.
Kaplan, Sidney and Emma Nogrady Kaplan. ''The Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution''. Amherst, Massachusetts: The University of Massachusetts Press, 1989. ISBN 0870236636.
Wood, W. J. ''Battles of the Revolutionary War, 1775 1781''. Originally published Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin, 1990 reprinted by Da Capo Press, 1995. ISBN 0306806177 (paperback) ISBN 0306813297 (2003 paperback reprint).
Further reading
Black, Jeremy. ''War for America: The Fight for Independence, 1775 1783''. (1991), British viewpoint
Boatner, Mark Mayo, III. ''Encyclopedia of the American Revolution.'' New York: McKay, 1966 revised 1974. ISBN 0811705781.
Buchanan, John. ''The Road to Valley Forge: How Washington Built the Army That Won the Revolution'' (2004)
Fischer, David Hackett. ''Washington's Crossing'' (2004), Pulitzer prize winning narrative of 1776 77
Higginbotham, Don. ''The War of American Independence: Military Attitudes, Policies, and Practice, 1763 1789'' (1983) Online in ACLS History E book Project overview of military topics
Kwasny, Mark V. ''Washington's Partisan War, 1775 1783'' (1996)
McCullough, David. ''1776'' (2005).
Mackesy, Piers. ''The War for America: 1775 1783'' (1992), British viewpoint.
Middlekauff, Robert. ''The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763 1789'' (1984)
Miller, John C. ''Triumph of Freedom, 1775 1783'' (1948)
Schecter, Barnet. (2002) The largest military venture of the entire war, and the British albatross
Thayer, Theodore. ''Nathanael Greene: Strategist of the American Revolution'' (1960)
Unger. Harlow Giles. ''Lafayette'' (2002)
Valentine Alan. ''Lord George Germain'' (1962), the British War Minister
Ward, Christopher. ''The War of the Revolution'' (2 vol 1952), battle history
Weintraub, Stanley. ''Iron Tears: America's Battle for Freedom, Britain's Quagmire: 1775 1783'' (2005).
External links
West Point Atlas
Category:American Revolutionary War
Category:National liberation movements
Category:Rebellion
bn:
da:USA's uafh ngighedskrig
de:Amerikanischer Unabh ngigkeitskrieg
eo:Usona Revolucio
es:Guerra de la Independencia de los Estados Unidos
fi:Yhdysvaltain vapaussota
fr:Guerre d'ind pendance des tats Unis d'Am rique
ga:Cogadh R abhl ideach Mheirice
he:
id:Perang Revolusi Amerika
is:Bandar ska frelsisstr i
it:Guerra di indipendenza americana
ja:
ko:
nl:Amerikaanse Onafhankelijkheidsoorlog
pl:Rewolucja ameryka ska
pt:Guerra da Independ ncia dos Estados Unidos da Am rica
sk:Americk vojna za nez vislos
sv:Amerikanska revolutionen
zh:
:''For the different meanings of Amp re, see the disambiguation page.''
The '''ampere''' (symbol: A) is the SI base unit of electric current equal to one coulomb per second. It is named after Andr Marie Amp re, one of the main discoverers of electromagnetism.
Definition
The ampere is that constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross section, and placed 1 metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a force equal to 2 newton per metre of length.
Explanation
Because it is a base unit, the definition of the ampere is not tied to any other electrical unit. The definition for the ampere is equivalent to fixing a value of the permeability of vacuum to ''''sub0 sub 4 H m. Prior to 1948, the so called "international ampere" was used, defined in terms of the electrolytic deposition rate of silver. The older unit is equal to 0.99985A.
The ampere is most accurately realised using an ampere balance, but is in practice maintained via Ohm's Law from the units of voltage and resistance, the volt and the ohm, since the latter two can be tied to physical phenomena that are relatively easy to reproduce, the Josephson junction and the quantum Hall effect, respectively.
The unit of electric charge, the coulomb, is defined in terms of the ampere: one coulomb is the amount of electric charge (formerly quantity of electricity) carried in a current of one ampere flowing for one second. Current (electricity), then, is the rate at which charge flows through a wire or surface. One ampere of current (I) is equal to a flow of one coulomb of charge (Q) per second of time (t):
:math mathrm I Q t , math
Since a coulomb is approximately equal to 6.24 elementary charges, one ampere is equivalent to 6.24 elementary charges, such as electrons, moving through a surface in one second. More precisely, using the SI definitions for the conventional values of the Josephson and von Klitzing constants, the ampere can be defined as exactly 6.24150962915265 elementary charges per second.
See also
SI
Ohm's Law
Electric shock
External links
Category:SI base units
Category:Units of electrical current
ar:
bg:
br:Amper
ca:Ampere
cs:Amp r
da:Ampere
de:Ampere
et:Amper
es:Amperio
eo:Ampero
eu:Anpere
fr:Amp re
gl:Ampere
ko:
hr:Amper
id:Ampere
it:Ampere
he:
lv:Amp rs
lt:Amperas
nl:Amp re
ja:
no:Ampere
nn:Ampere
pl:Amper
pt:Amp re
ru:
sq:Amperimetri
sk:Amp r
sl:Amper
sr:
fi:Ampeeri
sv:Ampere
tr:Amper
uk:
zh:
NOTOC
The following terms are used in American football and Canadian football. See also: wiktionary:Category:Football (American)
See also
Football
Football strategy
0 9
''n'' ''m'' defense:a defense with ''n'' down linemen and ''m'' linebackers, such as:
: 3 3: a defense with 3 lineman, 3 linebackers, and 5 defensive backs. Often called a '''3 3 stack.'''
: 3 4 defense:a defensive formation with 3 linemen and 4 linebackers. A professional derivative in the 1970's of the earlier Oklahoma or '''"50" defense''', which had 5 linemen and 2 linebackers. The 3 4 outside linebackers resemble "stand up ends" in the older defense.
: 4 3 defense:a defensive formation with 4 linemen and 3 linebackers. Several variations are employed. First used by coach Joe Kuharich.
: 4 6 defense :(pronounced ''four six defense'') a defense with four (4) down linemen and six (6) linebackers
46 defense :(pronounced ''forty six defense'') a formation of the 4 3 defense (four linemen and three linebackers) in which three defensive backs (the two cornerbacks and the strong safety) crowd the line of scrimmage. The remaining safety, which is the free safety, stays in the backfield. It is also known as the "Bear" defense because it was popularized by Buddy Ryan while coaching for the Chicago Bears. Not to be confused with the 4 6 (four six) defense.
50 defense :a once popular college defense with 5 defensive linemen and 2 linebackers.
A
audible: (from Latin ''audre'' to hear, to listen to) a play called by the quarterback at the line of scrimmage to change the play that was called in the huddle.
automatic :see audible
automatic first down: for several of the most severe penalties, including '''pass interference''' and all personal fouls, a first down is rewarded to the offensive team even if the yardage of that penalty is less than the yardage needed for a first down.
B
back :A position behind the offensive line, or behind the linebackers on defense.
blitz :a defensive maneuver in which one or more linebackers or defensive backs, who normally remain behind the line of scrimmage, instead charge into the opponents' backfield. However, in the 3 4 defense, one linebacker typically rushes the passer with the three down linemen. This is not considered a blitz. If an additional linebacker is sent, bringing the total number of rushers to five, it is a blitz.
blocking :when a player obstructs another player's path with his body.
bootleg :an offensive play predicated upon misdirection in which the quarterback pretends to hand the ball to another player, and then carries the ball in the opposite direction of the supposed ballcarrier with the intent of either passing or running (sometimes the quarterback has the option of doing either). A '''naked bootleg''' is a risky variation of this play when the quarterback has no blockers pulling out with him. Contrast with '''scramble''', '''sneak''', and '''draw'''
the box :an area on the defensive side of the ball, directly opposite the offensive linemen and about 5 yards deep having 8 players in the box means bringing in a defensive back, normally the strong safety, to help stop the offensive team's running game
C
center :a player position on offense. The center snaps the ball.
centre :Canadian "center"
chains :the 10 yard long chain that is used by the chain crew to measure for a new series of downs.
check off: see audible
chuck and duck : a style of offense with minimal pass protection requiring the Quarterback to "chuck" the ball then "duck" to avoid a defensive lineman.
clipping :an illegal block in which the victim is blocked from the back and below the waist the penalty is 15 yards. Originally, clipping was defined as any block from the back, but is now restricted to blocks below the waist. Other blocks from the back are now punished with 10 yard penalties.
coffin corner :the corner of the field of play. A punter, if he is close enough, will often attempt to kick the ball out of bounds close to the receiving team's goal line and pin them back near their own end zone.
contain :a defensive assignment. On outside runs such as the sweep, one defensive player (usually a cornerback or outside linebacker) is assigned to keep the rusher from getting to the edge of the play and turning upfield. If executed properly, the rusher will have to turn upfield before the play calls for it, giving the linebackers a better chance of stopping the play for little or no gain.
cornerback (CB):a defensive back who lines up near the line of scrimmage across from a '''wide receiver'''. Their primary job is to disrupt passing routes and to defend against short and medium passes in the passing game, and to contain the rusher on rushing plays.
counter :a running play in which the running back will take a step in the apparent direction of the play (ie, the direction the line is moving), only to get the handoff in the other direction. '''Weak side''' linemen will sometimes '''pull''' and lead the back downfield (sometimes called a '''counter trap'''), but not necessarily. The play is designed to get the defense to flow away from the action for a few steps as they follow the linemen, allowing more room for the running back.
crackback block :an illegal block delivered below the opponent's waist by an offensive player who had left the area of close line play and then returned to it, or was not within it at the snap. The term is also used to describe a legal block (delivered from the front, or from the side with the offensive player's helmet in front of the blocked player) by a wide receiver on a player who lined up inside of him.
cut
a sharp change of direction by a running player. Also called a cutback.
see "cut blocking" below
cut blocking: a blocking technique in which offensive linemen, and sometimes other blockers, block legally below the waist (i.e., from the front of the defensive player) in an attempt to bring the defenders to ground, making them unable to pursue a running back for the short time needed for the back to find a gap in the defense. The technique is somewhat controversial, as it carries a risk of serious leg injuries to the blocked defenders. The NFL's Denver Broncos are especially famous (or infamous) for using this technique.
D
dead ball :a ball which is no longer in play.
defensive back :a cornerback or safety position on the defensive team commonly defends against wide receivers on passing plays. Generally there are 4 defensive backs playing at a time but see '''nickel back''' and '''dime back'''.
defensive end (DE):a player position on defense who lines up on the outside of the defensive line.
defensive tackle (DT):a player position on defense on the inside of the defensive line. When a defensive tackle lines up directly across from the center, he is known often as a nose tackle.
defensive team :the team that begins a play from scrimmage not in possession of the ball.
dime back :the second extra, or sixth total, defensive back. Named because a dime has the same value as two nickels.
double reverse: a play in which the ball reverses direction twice behind the line of scrimmage. This is usually accomplished by means of two or three hand offs, each hand off going in an opposite direction as the previous one. Such a play is extremely infrequent in football.
:Some people confuse the ''double reverse'' with a ''reverse'', which is a play with two hand offs instead of three.
down :one of a series of plays in which the offensive team must advance at least 10 yards or lose possession. '''First down''' is the first of the plays fourth is the last down in American, and third in Canadian, football. A first down occurs after a change of possession of the ball, after advancing the ball 10 yards following a previous first down or after certain penalties.
down lineman: a player stationed in front of his line of scrimmage and who has either one (three point stance) or two (four point stance) hands on the ground.
draw play :a play in which the quarterback drops back as if to pass, then hands off to a running back or runs with the ball himself. Contrast with '''scramble'''
drive
A continuous set of offensive plays gaining substantial yardage and several first downs, usually leading to a scoring opportunity.
A blocking technique "drive block" in which an offensive player through an advantaged angle or with assistance drive a defensive player out of position creating a hole for the ball carrier.
drop kick :a kick in which the ball is dropped and kicked once it hits the ground and before it hits it again a half volley kick.
E
eligible receivers :players who may legally touch a forward pass. On the passer's team, these are: the '''ends''' (see below), the '''backs''', and (except in the NFL), one player in position to take a hand to hand '''snap''', i.e. a T '''quarterback''' provided the player's shirt displays a number in the ranges allowed for eligible receivers. All players of the opposing team are eligible receivers, and once the ball is touched by a player of the opposing team (anywhere in American, or beyond the lines of scrimmage in Canadian football), all players become eligible.
encroachment: an illegal action by a player: to cross the line of scrimmage and make contact with an opponent before the ball is snapped, or to line up offside and remain there when the ball is put in play.
end :a player position, either on offense or defense see '''linemen'''.
end zone :the area between the end line (or deadline in Canadian amateur football) and the goal line, bounded by the sidelines.
extra point :a single point scored in a conversion attempt by making what would be a field goal or a safety during general play.
F
fair catch :An unhindered catch of an opponent's kick. The player wanting to make one must signal for a fair catch by waving an arm overhead while the ball is in the air. After that signal, if he gains possession of the ball it is dead immediately and opponents will receive a fifteen yard penalty for hitting him.
fantasy football (American) :A game in which the participants (called "owners") each draft on their own or with the aid of software a team of real life NFL players and then score points based on those players' statistical performance on the field.
field of play: the area between both the goal lines and the sidelines, and in some contexts the space vertically above it.
field goal :score of 3 points made by place or drop kicking the ball through the opponent's goal other than via a kickoff or free kick following a safety formerly, "goal from the field".
flanker :a player position on offense. A wide receiver who lines up 1 or more yards off the line of scrimmage outside of another receiver.
flat :an area on the field between the line of scrimmage and 10 yards into the defensive backfield, and within 15 yards of the sideline. Running backs often run pass routes to the flat when they are the safety valve receiver.
Flea flicker :a trick play in which a running back laterals the ball back to the quarterback, who then throws a pass to a wide receiver or tight end.
formation :An arrangement of the offensive skill players. A formation usually is described in terms of how the running backs line up (e.g. I formation, which refers to the half back is lined up about 7 yard deep, and the fullback is lined up about 5 yards deep, both directly behind the quarterback) or how the wide receivers line up (e.g. Trips left, in which three wide receivers line up to the left of the linemen). Frequently, the formation will allude to both, such as with Strong I Slot Right, in which the halfback is lined up 7 yards deep behind the quarterback, the fullback is 5 yards deep behind the guard or tackle on the strong side, and both wide receivers are lined up on the right side of the offensive line.There are rules limiting what is legal in a formation. All five offensive linemen must be on the line of scrimage (a small amount of leeway is given to tackles when lined up for pass protection). Also, there must be one receiver (usally one tight end and one wide receiver) lined up on the line on either side of the offensive line (it doesn't matter how close they are to the tackles, as long as they are on the line). A receiver who is on the line may not go in motion.
forward pass :a pass that touches a person, object, or the ground closer to the opponent's end line than where it was released from, or is accidentally lost during a forward throwing motion.
four point stance: a down lineman's stance with four points on the ground, in other words, his two feet and his two hands
free kick :a kick made to put the ball in play as a kickoff or following a safety (the score "safety touch" in Canadian football) or fair catch.
free safety (FS):a player position on defense. Free safeties typically play deep, or "center field", and often have the pass defense responsibility of assisting other defensive backs in deep coverage (compared to strong safeties, who usually have an assigned receiver and run support responsibilities).
fullback (FB):a player position on offense. Originally, lined up deep behind the '''quarterback''' in the '''T formation'''. In modern formations this position may be varied, and this player has more blocking responsibilities in comparison to the '''halfback''' or '''tailback'''.
fumble :a ball that a player accidentally lost possession of in Canadian football the term includes muffs.
G
goal :a surface in space marked by a structure of two upright posts 18 feet 6 inches apart extending above a horizontal crossbar whose top edge is 10 feet off the ground. The goal is the surface above the bar and between the lines of the inner edges of the posts, extending infinitely upward, centered above each end line in American, and each goal line in Canadian football.
goal area :the end zone in Canadian professional football.
goal line :the front of the end zone.
gridiron :a football field, so called for its markings.
guard :one of two player positions on offense see '''linemen'''. A 5 player defensive line will have one, and a defensive line of 6 or more players, two guards, while a defensive line of fewer than 5 players has no guard.
H
Hail Mary :a long pass play, thrown towards a group of receivers near the '''end zone''' in hope of a '''touchdown'''. Used by a team as a last resort as time is running out in either of two halfs (usually by a team trailing in the second half). Refers to the Catholic prayer.
halfback :a player position on offense. Also known as a '''tailback'''.
halfback option play :a trick play in which the halfback throws a pass.
halo violation : From 1983 until the end of the 2002 season, in the NCAA (college football) the halo rule was a penalty for interference with the opportunity to catch a kick. The so called '''halo''' rule stated that no player of the kicking team may be within two yards of a receiving team player positioned to catch a punt or kickoff (before that person has touched the ball). The rule was abolished beginning in the 2003 season.
hand off :(also known as backward pass) a player's handing of a live ball to another player. The hand off goes either backwards or laterally, as opposed to a forward pass. Sometimes called a "switch" in touch football. (Note different usage of term from its rugby meaning.)
hash marks :lines between which the ball begins each play. The lines are parallel to and a distance in from the side lines and marked as broken lines.
H back :a player listed in a roster or depth chart as a fullback and playing as a ''h''ybrid of a fullback and a tight end
holder :a player who holds the ball upright for a place kick. Often backup quarterbacks are used for their superior ball handling ability
holding :there are two kinds of holding: offensive holding, illegally blocking a player from the opposing team by grabbing and holding his uniform or body and defensive holding, called against defensive players who impede receivers who are more than 5 yards from the line of scrimmage, but who are not actively making an attempt to catch the ball (if the defensive player were to impede an offensive player in the act of catching the ball, that would be the more severe penalty of pass interference)
huddle :an on field gathering of members of a team in order to secretly communicate instructions for the upcoming play.
I
I formation :A formation that includes a '''fullback''' and '''tailback''' lined up with the fullback directly in front of the tailback. If a third back is in line, this is referred to as a "full house I". If the third back is lined up along side the fullback, it is referred to as a "Power I".
incomplete pass :a forward pass of the ball which no player legally caught.
inbounds lines :the hash marks.
inside :
of a player's path: relatively close (in reference to the sides of the field) to where the ball was snapped from. Thus, a ballcarrier's path in crossing the neutral zone may be said to be "inside" of an opponent, or an "inside run" in general, and a rushing defensive player may be said to put on an "inside move" or "inside rush".
of the movement of the ball between players: directed toward a player who cuts between a player in the backfield who throws or hands the ball and the place from which it was snapped. Thus, an "inside pass" or "inside handoff". An "inside reverse" (sometimes called a scissors play) is a reverse play via an inside handoff.
intentional grounding :An illegal forward pass thrown beyond the line of scrimmage without an intented reciever and no chance of completion to any offensive player. Intentional grounding is not called in the case of a '''spike''' or if the quarterback was outside the '''tackle box''' at the time of the pass.
interception :the legal catching of a forward pass thrown by an opposing player.
J
Jumbo :an offensive package which includes two tight ends, a full back and a half back. Similar to '''heavy jumbo''', in which either the half back or the fullback is replaced by another tight end. Often one or more of the "tight ends" is actually a linebacker (The New England Patriots use Mike Vrabel this way he has 6 career regular season TDs) or offensive linemen. In these cases, the player must report in as an eligible receiver, whereas a tight end is assumed to be one.
K
kick :as a verb, to strike the ball deliberately with the foot as a noun, such an action producing a punt, place kick, or drop kick
kickoff :a free kick which starts each half, or restarts the game following a touchdown or field goal. The kickoff may be a place kick in American or Canadian football, or a drop kick in American football.
kick returner :a player on the receiving team who specializes in fielding kicks and running them back.
kneel down :a low risk play in which the quarterback kneels down after receiving the snap, ending the play. Used to run out the clock.
L
lateral :a pass thrown to the side or backward. Also called "backward pass" in American football, "onside pass" in Canadian football.
line of scrimmage scrimmage line :one of two vertical planes parallel to the goal line when the ball is to be put in play by scrimmage. For each team in American football, the line of scrimmage is through the point of the ball closest to their end line. The two lines of scrimmage are called ''offensive line of scrimmage'' and ''defensive line of scrimmage''
:In Canadian football, the line of scrimmage of the defensive team is one yard their side of the ball.
line to gain :a line parallel to the goal lines, such that having the ball dead beyond it entitles the offense to a new series of downs, i.e. a new "first down". The line is 10 yards in advance of where the ball was to be snapped for the previous first down.
linebacker :a player position on defense. The linebackers typically play 1 to 3 yards behind the defensive '''linemen''' and have both run and pass defense responsibilities. However they are often called on to '''blitz''', and in some formations a linebacker may be designated as a "rush linebacker", rushing the passer on almost every play.
lineman :a defensive or offensive position on the line of scrimmage.
On offense, the player snapping the ball is the '''center'''. The players on either side of him are the '''guard'''s, and the players to the outside of him are the '''tackle'''s. The players on the end of the line are the '''end'''s. This may be varied in an '''unbalanced line'''.
On defense, the outside linemen are '''end'''s, and those inside are '''tackle'''s. If there are 5 or 6 linemen, the inner most linemen are known as '''guard'''s. This is rare in professional football except for goal line defense, but is sometimes seen in high school or college.
live ball :any ball that is in play, whether it is a player's possession or not. The ball is live during plays from scrimmage and free kicks, including kickoffs.
long snapper :a center who specializes in the long, accurate snaps required for punts and field goal attempts. Most teams employ a specialist long snapper instead of requiring the normal center to perform this duty.
loose ball :any ball that is in play and not in a player's possession. This includes a ball in flight during a lateral or forward pass.
M
man coverage :same as man to man coverage
man in motion :a player on offense who is moving backwards or parallel to the line of scrimmage just before the snap. In American football, only one offensive player can be in motion at a time, cannot be moving toward the line of scrimmage at the snap, and may not be a player who is on the line of scrimmage. In Canadian football, more than one back can be in motion, and may move in any direction as long as they are behind the line of scrimmage at the snap.
man to man coverage :a defense in which all players in pass coverage, typically linebackers and defensive backs, cover a specific player. Pure man coverage is very rare defenses typically mix man and zone coverage.
mike :the ''m''iddle linebacker.
mo :the other middle linebacker in a 3 4 formation.
muff :a loose ball that is dropped or mishandled while the player is attempting to gain possession.
N
National Football League :the largest professional American football league.
neutral zone :the region between the lines of scrimmage or between the free kick restraining lines
NFL :the National Football League
nickel back :an extra, or fifth, defensive back. Named after the coin, worth five cents. Popularized by the Miami Dolphins in the 1970s, now common.
no huddle offense :a tactic wherein the offense quickly forms near the line of scrimmage without huddling before the next play.
nose tackle :a tackle in a 3 man defensive line who lines up "opposite the '''center''''s nose".
O
offensive team :the team with possession of the ball
offside :
an infraction of the rule that requires both teams to be on their own side of their restraining line as or before the ball is put play. Offside is normally called on the defensive team.
in Canadian football, at the time a ball is kicked by a teammate, being ahead of the ball, or being the person who held the ball for the place kick
one back formation :a formation where the '''offensive team''' has one '''running back''' in the backfield with the '''quarterback'''. Other '''eligible receivers''' are near the '''line of scrimmage'''.
onside kick :a play in which the kicking team tries to recover the kicked ball.
option :
Usually, a type of play in which the quarterback has the option of handing off, keeping, or laterally passing to one or more backs. Often described by a type of formation or play action, such as triple option, veer option, or counter option. Teams running option plays often specialize in them.
Less often, a play in which a back may either pass or run
outside :opposite of '''inside'''
P
package :the group of players on the field for a given play. For example, the Nickel Package substitutes a cornerback for either a linebacker or a defensive lineman (the latter is referred to as a 3 3 5 Nickel), or the Jumbo package substitutes a wide receiver with a tight end.
pass interference :when a player illegally hinders an eligible receiver's opportunity to catch forward pass.
passing play: a play in which a forward pass is made
place kick :kicking the ball from where it has been placed stationary on the ground or, where legal, on a tee.
play
:the action between the '''snap''' of the ball, and the end of play signaled by the official's whistle for a '''tackle''' or out of bounds
:the plan of action the offensive team has for each snap, for example a running play or pass play
play action
: a tactic in which the quarterback fakes either a handoff or a throw in order to draw the defense away from the intended offensive method
play clock: a timer used to increase the pace of the game between plays. The offensive team must snap the ball before the time expires. Currently, the NFL uses 40 seconds (25 seconds after a time out).
playing field: see field of play
pocket :an area on the offensive side of the line of scrimmage, where the offensive linemen attempt to prevent the defensive players from reaching the quarterback during passing plays
position :a place where a player plays relative to teammates, and or a role filled by that player
prevent defense :a defensive strategy that utilizes deep zone coverage in order to prevent a big pass play from happening downfield, usually at the expense of giving up yards at shorter distances. Often used against '''hail mary''' plays, or at the end of the game when the defending team is protecting a lead. Disparaged by many fans. John Madden, legendary player, coach, and commentator, has been quoted as saying, "The only thing a prevent defense prevents is a win."
pulling :a term used to describe an offensive lineman who, instead of blocking the player in front of him, steps back and moves down the line("pulls") to block another player, usually in a "trap" or "sweep."
punt :a kick in which the ball is dropped and kicked before it reaches the ground. Used to give up the ball to the opposition after offensive '''downs''' have been used, as far down the field as possible.
punter :a kicker who specializes in punting as opposed to place kicking.
Q
quarterback (QB):an offensive player who lines up behind the center, from whom he takes the snap.
quick kick :an unexpected punt.
R
receiver :a wide receiver.
reception :when a player catches (receives) the ball.
red dog :a blitz.
red zone :the area between the 20 yard line and the goal of the defensive team.
referee (R): the official who directs the other officials on the field, He is one of seven officials.
restraining line :a team's respective line of scrimmage
:at a free kick, the line the ball is to be kicked from (for the kicking team), or a line 10 yards in advance of that (for the receiving team)
reverse :an offensive play in which a ballcarrier going toward one side of the field hands or tosses the ball to a teammate who is running in the opposite direction (if the second ballcarrier is an end, it is an "end around").
run and shoot :an offensive philosophy designed to force the defense to show its hand prior to the snap of the ball by splitting up receivers and sending them in motion. Receivers run patterns based on the play of the defenders, rather than a predetermined plan.
running back
:a player position on offense. Although the term usually refers to the halfback or tailback, fullbacks are also considered runningbacks.
running play: a play where the offense attempts to advance the ball without passing.
rush :trying to tackle or hurry a player before he can throw a pass or make a kick
:a running play
S
sack :tackling a ball carrier who intends to throw a forward pass. A sack is also awarded if a player forces a fumble of the ball, or the ball carrier to go out of bounds, behind the line of scrimmage on an apparent intended forward pass play. The term gained currency ca. 1970.
safety
a player position on defense see '''free safety''' and '''strong safety'''.
a method of scoring (worth two points) by downing an opposing ballcarrier in his own end zone, forcing the opposing ballcarrier out of his own end zone AND out of bounds, or forcing the offensive team to fumble the ball so that it exits the end zone. A safety is also awarded if the offensive team commits a penalty within its own end zone. After a safety, the team that was scored upon must kick the ball to the scoring team from its own 20 yard line.brA safety scored during a try scores 1 point and is followed by a kickoff as for any other try.
safety valve :a receiver whose job it is to get open for a short pass in case all other receivers are covered.
sam :the ''s''trong side outside linebacker
scramble :on a called passing play, when the quarterback runs from the pocket in an attempt to avoid being sacked, giving the receivers more time to get open or attempting to gain positive yards by running himself.
screen pass :a short forward pass to a receiver who has blockers in front of him. The receiver in this play is usually a running back, although wide receiver and tight end screens are also used. Although the are both called screen passes, the wide receiver screen and the running back screen are used for very different reasons. In the case of a running back screen, the play is designed to allow the pass rushers by the offensive linemen, leaving the defender out of position to make a play. The play is usually employed to defuse the pass rush in the case of a running back screen. The Wide Receiver screen is a much faster developing play, designed to catch the defense off guard.
scrimmage :see: play from scrimmage
shift :when two or more offensive players move at the same time before the snap. All players who move in a shift must come to a complete stop prior to the snap.
shooting :the action of a linebacker or defensive back to blitz
shotgun formation :formation in which offensive team may line up at the start of a play. In this formation, the quarterback receives the snap 5 8 yards behind the center.
sideline :
one of the lines marking each side of the field
as adjective: on the field near a sideline
side zone :the area between a hash mark and a sideline
single wing : a formation, now out of fashion, most popular about 1920 50, with an overload and wingback on one side and two backs about 5 yards deep to receive the snap.
slobber knocker : a particularly gruesome tackle or hit.
slot :The area between a split end and the offensive line. A pass receiver lined up in the slot at the snap of the ball may be called a slotback or slot receiver.
snap :the handoff or pass from the center that begins a play from scrimmage.
sneak :an offensive play in which the quarterback, immediately on receiving the snap dives forward with the ball. The play is used when a team needs a very short gain to reach either the goal line or the line to gain.
special teams :the units that handle kickoffs, punts, free kicks and field goal attempts.
spike :a play in which the quarterback throws the ball at the ground immediately after the snap. Technically an incomplete pass, it stops the clock. Note that a spike is not considered '''intentional grounding'''.
splits :the distance between the feet of adjacent offensive linemen. Said to be wide, if there is a large gap between players, or narrow, if the gap is small.
split end :a player position on offence. A receiver who lines up on the line of scrimmage, several yards outside the offensive linemen. The term is no longer used in American Football, having been long since replaced by the wide receiver or wideout, with no distinction between whether the receiver is on the line or not.
squib kick :a type of '''kickoff''' in which the ball is intentionally kicked low to the ground, typically bouncing on the ground a few times before being picked up. This is done in the hopes of preventing a long return, as the ball is often picked up by one of the '''upmen''' as opposed to the designated kickoff returner.
sticks : the pole attached to the end of the 10 yard chain that is used by the chain crew to measure for a new series of downs i.e. the line to gain a new "first down".
stiff arm or straight arm :a ballcarrier warding off a would be tackler by pushing them away with a straight arm.
strong i :a formation wherein the tailback is lined up deep directly behind the quarterback, and the fullback is lined up offset to the strong side of the formation.
strong safety (SS):a kind of safety on defense, as opposed to a free safety. This is a central defensive back originally, the term indicated that he lined up on the strong side of the field and covered the tight end. However, the modern usage of the term now indicates a central defensive back with responsibility for run and pass support, slightly favoring run support.
strong side :simplistically speaking, the side of the field (left or right) that has the most players, but it depends on the formations of the teams. When a team uses one tight end, the strong side is the side of the field where the tight end lines up. If the offensive package uses no tight end, or more than one tight end, the strong side is the side of the field with the most offensive players on or just behind the line of scrimmage.
stunt:a tactic used by defensive linemen in which they switch roles in an attempt to get past the blockers. Both defenders will start with power rushes, with the stunting defender getting more of a push. The other lineman will then go around him, ideally using him as a pick to get free from his blocker.
sweep :a running play in which several blockers lead a running back on a designed play to the outside. Depending on the number of blockers and the design of the play this is sometimes referred to as a "power sweep" or "student body right" (or left).
T
T formation :a classic offensive formation with the quarterback directly behind the center and three running backs behind the quarterback, forming a 'T'. Numerous variations have been developed including the split T, wing T, and wishbone T.
tackle
the act of forcing a ball carrier to the ground
a player position on the line, either an offensive tackle or a defensive tackle see '''linemen'''.
tackle box: the area between where the two offensive tackles line up prior to the snap.
tailback :player position on offense farthest ("deepest") back, except in kicking formations. Also often referred to as the '''running back''', particularly in a '''one back offense'''.
three and out: when an offensive team fails to gain a first down on the first three plays of a drive, and thus is forced to punt on fourth down.
three point stance: a down lineman's stance with three points on the ground, in another words, his two feet and one of his hands
tight end :a player position on offense, an eligible receiver ligned up on the line of scrimmage, next to the offensive tackle. Tight ends are used as blockers during running plays, and either run a route or stay in to block during passing plays.
touchback :the act of downing the ball behind one's own goal line after the ball had been propelled over the goal by the opposing team. After a touchback, the team that downed it gets the ball at their own 20 yard line.
touchdown :a play worth six points, accomplished by gaining legal possession of the ball in the opponent's end zone. It also allows the team a chance for one extra point by kicking the ball or a two point conversion see "try" below.
trap :a basic blocking pattern in which a defensive lineman is allowed past the line of scrimmage, only to be blocked at an angle by a "pulling" lineman. Designed to gain a preferred blocking angle and larger hole in the line.
trips :a formation in which 3 wide receivers are lined up close to one another on the same side of the field. Also refers to those receivers. Used to create potential for confusion or collision between defenders as these receivers split up.
two point conversion :a play worth two points accomplished by gaining legal possession of the ball in the opponent's end zone after a touchdown has been made see "try" below
try :a scrimmage play, from close to their opponent's goal line, awarded to a team which has scored a touchdown, allowing them (and in some codes, their opponents) to score an additional 1 or 2 points also called "try for point", "conversion", "convert" (Canadian), "extra point(s)", "point(s) after (touchdown)" or PAT
U
unbalanced line :usually refers to an offensive formation which does not have an equal number of '''linemen''' on each side of the ball. Done to gain a blocking advantage on one side of the formation typically one '''tackle''' or '''guard''' lines up on the other side of the ball. For example a common alignment would be E G C G T T E.
upman :during a kickoff, every player on the return team is called an "upman" with the exception of the one or two designated kickoff returners, who stand furthest away from the starting point of the kicking team.
V
Veer :a type of '''option''' offense using 2 backs in the backfield, one behind each guard or tackle (referred to as split backs), allowing a triple option play (give to either back or quarterback keep).
W
weak i :a formation wherein the tailback is lined up deep directly behind the quarterback, and the fullback is lined up offset to the weak side of the formation.
weak side :when one tight end is used, the side of the field opposite the tight end. In other offensive packages, the side of the field with the fewest offensive players on or just behind the line of scrimmage.
West Coast offense :an offensive philosophy that uses short, high percentage passes as the core of a ball control offense. Widely used but originally made popular by San Francisco 49ers coach Bill Walsh. A main component of the west coast offense is use of all the eligible receivers in the short passing game.
wide receiver :a player position on offense. He is split wide (usually about 10 yards) from the formation and plays on the line of scrimmage as a '''split end''' or one yard off as a '''flanker'''.
will :the ''w''eak side linebacker
wing back :a player position in some offensive formations. Lines up just outside the '''tight end''' and one yard off the '''line of scrimmage'''. May be a receiver but is more typically used as a blocking back.
'''wishbone''': a formation involving three running backs lined up behind the quarterback in the shape of a Y, similar to the shape of a wishbone.
X
X receiver :Term used in play calling that usually refers to the '''split end''', or the wide receiver that lines up on the line of scrimmage. For example, "Split Right Jet 529 X Post" tells the X receiver to run a post route.
Y
Y receiver :Term usually used in offensive play calling to refer to the '''tight end'''. For example, "Buffalo Right 534 Boot Y Corner" tells the Y receiver to run a corner route.
Z
Z receiver :a term used in offensive play calling that usually refers to the '''flanker''', or the wide receiver that lines up off the line of scrimmage. For example, "Panther Gun 85 Slant Z Go" tells the Z receiver to run a '''go''' (also called a '''fly''' or '''streak''') route.
zone defense :a defense in which players who are in pass coverage cover zones of the field, instead of individual players. Pure zone packages are seldom used most defenses employ some combination of zone and man coverage.
zone blitz : A defensive package combining a blitz with zone pass coveragee. Allows the defense to choose the blitzer after the offense shows formation and pass coverage requirements, and features unpredictable blitzes from different linebackers and defensive backs. Invented by coach Dick LeBeau.
American football
are often used to represent algorithms.
In mathematics and computer science, an '''algorithm''' is a procedure (a finite set of well defined instructions) for accomplishing some task which, given an initial state, will terminate in a defined end state.
Informally, the concept of an algorithm is often illustrated by the example of a recipe, although many algorithms are much more complex algorithms often have steps that repeat (iterate) or require decisions (such as logic or comparison).
The concept of an algorithm originated as a means of recording procedures for solving mathematical problems such as finding the common divisor of two numbers or multiplying two numbers. The concept was formalized in 1936 through Alan Turing's Turing machines and Alonzo Church's lambda calculus, which in turn formed the foundation of computer science.
Most algorithms can be implemented by computer programs.
History
The word ''algorithm'' comes from the name of the 9th century mathematician Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Musa al Khwarizmi. The word ''algorism'' originally referred only to the rules of performing arithmetic using Hindu Arabic numerals but evolved via European Latin translation of al Khwarizmi's name into ''algorithm'' by the 18th century. The word evolved to include all definite procedures for solving problems or performing tasks.
The first case of an algorithm written for a computer was Ada Byron's notes on the analytical engine written in 1842, for which she is considered by many to be the world's first programmer. However, since Charles Babbage never completed his analytical engine the algorithm was never implemented on it.
The lack of mathematical rigor in the "well defined procedure" definition of algorithms posed some difficulties for mathematicians and logicians of the 19th and early 20th centuries. This problem was largely solved with the description of the Turing machine, an abstract model of a computer formulated by Alan Turing, and the demonstration that every method yet found for describing "well defined procedures" advanced by other mathematicians could be emulated on a Turing machine (a statement known as the Church Turing thesis). Nowadays, a formal criterion for an algorithm is that it is a procedure that can be implemented on a completely specified Turing machine or one of the equivalent formalisms.
Formalization of algorithms
Algorithms are essential to the way computers process information, because a computer program is essentially an algorithm that tells the computer what specific steps to perform (in what specific order) in order to carry out a
specified task, such as calculating employees paychecks or printing students report cards. Thus, an algorithm can be considered to be any sequence of operations which can be performed by a Turing complete system.
Typically, when an algorithm is associated with processing information, data is read from an input source or device, written to an output sink or device, and or stored for further use. Stored data is regarded as part of the internal state of the entity performing the algorithm. The state is stored in a data structure.
For any such computational process, the algorithm must be rigorously defined: specified in the way it applies in all possible circumstances that could arise. That is, any conditional steps must be systematically dealt with, case by case the criteria for each case must be clear (and computable).
Because an algorithm is a precise list of precise steps, the order of computation will almost always be critical to the functioning of the algorithm. Instructions are usually assumed to be listed explicitly, and are described as starting 'from the top' and going 'down to the bottom', an idea that is described more formally by ''flow of control''.
So far, this discussion of the formalization of an algorithm has assumed the premises of imperative programming. This is the most common conception, and it attempts to describe a task in discrete, 'mechanical' means. Unique to this conception of formalized algorithms is the assignment operation, setting the value of a variable. It derives from the intuition of 'memory' as a scratchpad. There is an example below of such an assignment.
See functional programming and logic programming for alternate conceptions of what constitutes an algorithm.
Some writers restrict the definition of ''algorithm'' to procedures that eventually finish. Others include procedures that could run forever without stopping, arguing that some entity may be required to carry out such permanent tasks. In the latter case, success can no longer be defined in terms of halting with a meaningful output. Instead, terms of success that allow for unbounded output sequences must be defined. For example, an algorithm that verifies if there are more zeros than ones in an infinite random binary sequence must run forever to be effective. If it is implemented correctly, however, the algorithm's output will be useful: for as long as it examines the sequence, the algorithm will give a positive response while the number of examined zeros outnumber the ones, and a negative response otherwise. Success for this algorithm could then be defined as eventually outputting only positive responses if there are actually more zeros than ones in the sequence, and in any other case outputting any mixture of positive and negative responses.
Summarizing the above discussion about what algorithm should consist.
Zero or more Inputs
One or more Outputs
Finiteness or computability
Definitiveness or Preciseness
Implementation
An algorithm is a set of steps to perform a computation. Most algorithms will be implemented as computer programs. They can be expressed in any notation including English for documenting and research purposes. A more preferred way is to embody (or sometimes called ''codify'') an algorithm by writing of its pseudocode. Pseudocode representation avoids ambiguities that are common in English statements. The pseudocode can also be translated into particular programming language more straightforwardly. Algorithms are implemented not only as computer programs, but often also by other means, such as in a biological neural network (for example, the human brain implementing arithmetic or an insect relocating food), in electric circuits, or in a mechanical device.
Example
One of the simplest algorithms is to find the largest number in an (unsorted) list of numbers. The solution necessarily requires looking at every number in the list, but only once at each. From this follows a simple algorithm, which can be stated in English as
Let us assume the first item is largest.
Look at each of the remaining items in the list and make the following adjustment.
:a. If it is larger than the largest item we gathered so far, make a note of it.
The latest noted item is the largest in the list when the process is complete.
And here is a more formal coding of the algorithm in pseudocode:
Input: A non empty list of numbers ''L''.
Output: The ''largest'' number in the list ''L''.
''largest'' ''L''sub0 sub
'''for each''' ''item'' '''in''' the list ''Lsub1 sub'', '''do'''
'''if''' the ''item'' ''largest'', '''then'''
''largest'' the ''item''
'''return''' ''largest''
For a more complex example, see Euclid's algorithm, which is one of the oldest algorithms.
Algorithm analysis
As it happens, most people who implement algorithms want to know how much of a particular resource (such as time or storage) is required for a given algorithm. Methods have been developed for the analysis of algorithms to obtain such quantitative answers for example, the algorithm above has a time requirement of O(''n''), using the big O notation with ''n'' as the length of the list. At all times the algorithm only needs to remember two values: the largest number found so far, and its current position in the input list. Therefore it is said to have a space requirement of ''O(1)''. (Note that the size of the inputs is not counted as space used by the algorithm.)
Different algorithms may complete the same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time, space, or effort than others. For example, given two different recipes for making potato salad, one may have ''peel the potato'' before ''boil the potato'' while the other presents the steps in the reverse order, yet they both call for these steps to be repeated for all potatoes and end when the potato salad is ready to be eaten. ! poor example .. who would boil each potato separately? and making a salad in general requires no cooking ...
The analysis and study of algorithms is one discipline of computer science, and is often practiced abstractly (without the use of a specific programming language or other implementation). In this sense, it resembles other mathematical disciplines in that the analysis focuses on the underlying principles of the algorithm, and not on any particular implementation. The pseudocode is simplest and abstract enough for such analysis.
Classes
There are various ways to classify algorithms, each with its own merits.
Classification by implementation
One way to classify algorithms is by implementation means.
'''Recursion''' or '''iteration''': A recursive algorithm is one that invokes (makes reference to) itself repeatedly until a certain condition matches, which is a method common to functional programming. Iterative algorithms use repetitive constructs like loops and sometimes additional data structures like stacks to solve the given problems. Some problems are naturally suited for one implementation to other. For example, towers of hanoi is well understood in recursive implementation. Every recursive version has an equivalent (but possibly more or less complex) iterative version, and vice versa.
'''Serial''' or '''parallel''': Algorithms are usually discussed with the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time. Those computers are sometimes called serial computers. An algorithm designed for such an environment is called a serial algorithm, as opposed to parallel algorithms, which take advantage of computer architectures where several processors can work on a problem at the same time. Parallel algorithms divide the problem into more symmetrical or asymmetrical subproblems and pass them to many processors and put the results back together at one end. The resource consumption in parallel algorithms is both processor cycles on each processors and also the communication overhead between the processors. Sorting algorithms can be parallelized efficiently, but their communication overhead is expensive. Recursive algorithms are generally parallelizable. Some problems have no parallel algorithms, and are called inherently serial problems. Those problems cannot be solved faster by employing more processors. Iterative numerical methods, such as Newton's method or the three body problem, are algorithms which are inherently serial.
'''Deterministic''' or '''random''': Deterministic algorithms solve the problem with exact decision at every step of the algorithm. Random algorithms as their name suggests explore the search space randomly until an acceptable solution is found. Various heuristic algorithms (see below) generally fall into the random category.
'''Exact''' or '''approximate''': While many algorithms reach an exact solution, approximation algorithms seek an approximation which is close to the true solution. Approximation may use either a deterministic or a random strategy. Such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems.
Classification by design paradigm
Another way of classifying algorithms is by their design methodology or paradigm. There is a certain number of paradigms, each different from the other. Furthermore, each of these categories will include many different types of algorithms. Some commonly found paradigms include:
'''Divide and conquer'''. A divide and conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces an instance of a problem to one or more smaller instances of the same problem (usually recursively), until the instances are small enough to solve easily. One such example of divide and conquer is merge sorting. Sorting can be done on each segment of data after dividing data into segments and sorting of entire data can be obtained in conquer phase by merging them. A simpler variant of divide and conquer is called '''decrease and conquer algorithm''', that solves an identical subproblem and uses the solution of this subproblem to solve the bigger problem. Divide and conquer divides the problem into multiple subproblems and so conquer stage will be more complex than decrease and conquer algorithms. An example of decrease and conquer algorithm is binary search algorithm.
'''Dynamic programming'''. When a problem shows optimal substructure, meaning the optimal solution to a problem can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems, and overlapping subproblems, meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many different problem instances, we can often solve the problem quickly using ''dynamic programming'', an approach that avoids recomputing solutions that have already been computed. For example, the shortest path to a goal from a vertex in a weighted graph can be found by using the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices. Dynamic programming and memoization go together. The main difference between dynamic programming and divide and conquer is, subproblems are more or less independent in divide and conquer, where as the overlap of subproblems occur in dynamic programming. The difference between the dynamic programming and straightforward recursion is in caching or memoization of recursive calls. Where subproblems are independent, there is no chance of repetition and memoization does not help, so dynamic programming is not a solution for all. By using memoization or maintaining a table of subproblems already solved, dynamic programming reduces the exponential nature of many problems to polynomial complexity.
'''The greedy method'''. A greedy algorithm is similar to a dynamic programming algorithm, but the difference is that solutions to the subproblems do not have to be known at each stage instead a "greedy" choice can be made of what looks best for the moment. Difference between dynamic programming and greedy method is, it extends the solution with the best possible decision (not all feasible decisions) at a algorithmic stage based on the current local optimum and the best decision (not all possible decisions) made in previous stage. It is not exhaustive, and does not give accurate answer to many problems. But when it works, it will be the fastest method. The most popular greedy algorithm is finding the minimal spanning tree as given by Kruskal.
'''Linear programming'''. When solving a problem using linear programming, the program is put into a number of linear inequalities and then an attempt is made to maximize (or minimize) the inputs. Many problems (such as the maximum flow for directed graphs) can be stated in a linear programming way, and then be solved by a 'generic' algorithm such as the simplex algorithm. A complex variant of linear programming is called integer programming, where the solution space is restricted to all integers.
'''Reduction''': It is another powerful technique in solving many problems by transforming one problem into another problem. For example, one selection algorithm for finding the median in an unsorted list is first translating this problem into sorting problem and finding the middle element in sorted list. The goal of reduction algorithms is finding the simplest transformation such that complexity of reduction algorithm does not dominate the complexity of reduced algorithm. This technique is also called ''transform and conquer''.
'''Search and enumeration'''. Many problems (such as playing chess) can be modeled as problems on graphs. A graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph and is useful for such problems. This category also includes the search algorithms and backtracking.
'''The probabilistic and heuristic paradigm'''. Algorithms belonging to this class fit the definition of an algorithm more loosely.
Probabilistic algorithms are those that make some choices randomly (or pseudo randomly) for some problems, it can in fact be proven that the fastest solutions must involve some randomness.
Genetic algorithms attempt to find solutions to problems by mimicking biological evolutionary processes, with a cycle of random mutations yielding successive generations of "solutions". Thus, they emulate reproduction and "survival of the fittest". In genetic programming, this approach is extended to algorithms, by regarding the algorithm itself as a "solution" to a problem. Also there are
Heuristic algorithms, whose general purpose is not to find an optimal solution, but an approximate solution where the time or resources to find a perfect solution are not practical. An example of this would be local search, taboo search, or simulated annealing algorithms, a class of heuristic probabilistic algorithms that vary the solution of a problem by a random amount. The name "simulated annealing" alludes to the metallurgic term meaning the heating and cooling of metal to achieve freedom from defects. The purpose of the random variance is to find close to globally optimal solutions rather than simply locally optimal ones, the idea being that the random element will be decreased as the algorithm settles down to a solution.
Classification by field of study
Every field of science has its own problems and needs efficient algorithms. Related problems in one field are often studied together. Some example classes are search algorithms, sort algorithms, merge algorithms, numerical algorithms, graph algorithms, string algorithms, computational geometric algorithms, combinatorial algorithms, machine learning, cryptography, data compression algorithms and parsing techniques.
''See also:'' '''List of algorithms''' for more details.
Some of these fields overlap with each other and advancing in algorithms for one field causes advancement in many fields and sometimes completely unrelated fields. For example, dynamic programming is originally invented for optimisation in resource consumption in industries, but it is used in solving broad range of problems in many fields.
Classification by complexity
Some algorithms complete in linear time, and some complete in exponential amount of time, and some never complete. One problem may have multiple algorithms, and some problems may have no algorithms. Some problems have no known efficient algorithms. There are also mappings from some problems to other problems. So computer scientists found it is suitable to classify the problems rather than algorithms into equivalence classes based on the complexity.
''See also:'' '''Complexity classes''' for more details.
Legal issues
Some countries allow algorithms to be patented when embodied in software or in hardware. Patents have long been a controversial issue (see, for example, the software patent debate).
Some countries do not allow certain algorithms, such as cryptographic algorithms, to be exported from that country.
See also
Algorism
Approximation algorithms
Data structure
Randomized algorithm
Timeline of algorithms
Wikibooks:Algorithms
Notes
Although in this example the size of the numbers itself is unbounded, one could therefore argue that the space requirement is O(log ''n''), in practice, however, the space taken up by a number is fixed.
References
Important algorithm related publications
External links
Gaston H. Gonnet and Ricardo Baeza Yates: Example programs from Free source code for many important algorithms.
. "This is a dictionary of algorithms, algorithmic techniques, data structures, archetypical problems, and related definitions."
An interesting way of using algorithms to make music.
is a web site dedicated to algorithms.
Category:Arabic words
Category:Discrete mathematics
Category:Mathematical logic
af:Algoritme
an:Algoritmo
ast:Algoritmu
bg:
bs:Algoritam
ca:Algorisme
cs:Algoritmus
da:Algoritme
de:Algorithmus
el:
eo:Algoritmo
es:Algoritmo
et:Algoritm
fi:Algoritmi
fr:Algorithmique
gl:Algoritmo
he:
hr:Algoritam
hu:Algoritmus
id:Algoritma
it:Algoritmo
ja:
ko:
lb:Algorithmus
lt:Algoritmas
nl:Algoritme
no:Algoritme
pl:Algorytm
pt:Algoritmo
ro:Algoritm
ru:
simple:Algorithm
sk:Algoritmus
sl:Algoritem
sr:
su:Algoritma
sv:Algoritm
th:
tl:Algoritmo
tr:Algoritma
uk:
vi:Thu t to n
zh:
An '''annual plant''' is a plant that usually germinates, flowers and dies in one year.
Annuals are often used in gardens to provide splashes of color, as they tend to produce more flowers than perennials. Some perennials and biennials are grown in gardens as annuals for convenience, particularly if they are not considered hardy for the local climate. Also, many food plants are, or are grown as, annuals, including most domesticated grains.
The life cycle of an annual can occur in a period as short as two or three months in some species, though most last a bit longer. Vegetables grown in apartment container gardens can last up to two years, if they are maintained indoors during the winter months.
Examples of annual plants include peas, cauliflowers, basil, and marigolds.
See also
Biennial plant
Perennial plant
Category:Botany
Category: gardening
ca:Planta anual
de:Einj hrige Pflanze
is:Ein r jurt
ru:
ta:
'''''Anthophyta''''' is a descriptive botanical name that may be used (Art 16, ''ICBN'') for what, these days, is more commonly known as ''Angiospermae'', although in some classifications it was used for what now is known as ''Spermatophyta''.
The name ''Anthophyta'' literally means "flowering plants" derived from the Greek 'anthos' "flower" and 'phyton' "plant".
sort31 Anthophyta
sort31 Anthophyta
NOTOC
:''This page is about the word "atlas"''. ''See also the abbreviation "ATLAS" (written in all caps)''.
The most common meaning of '''atlas''' is atlas (cartography), a collection of maps. By extension, a road atlas is a collection of road maps.
Many other entities are also called "atlas", some of which are listed below:
In science
Atlas (anatomy) is the topmost cervical vertebra of the spine
Atlas beetle, insect
Atlas cedar, tree
Atlas (moon), a moon of Saturn
Atlas (crater), on the Earth's moon
Atlas (star), a star in the Pleiades star cluster
Atlas Experiment The particle detector experiment.
In computers
Atlas Computer, University of Manchester
Titan (computer), also know as Atlas 2, University of Cambridge
UNIVAC 1101, Atlas Computer, Engineering Research Associates
UNIVAC 1103, Atlas II computer, Engineering Research Associates
ATLAS, a programming language used for automated test equipment
ATLAS.ti, a qualitative analysis software
ATLAS (programming), Microsoft's implementation of Ajax (programming) for ASP.NET
In books and literature
''The Atlas'', a book by the American author William Vollmann
''Atlas'', a book of photography by the German artist Gerhard Richter
''Atlas Shrugged'', a novel by Ayn Rand
Atlas Games, publisher
Atlas Comics (1950s) was, along with the 1940s' Timely Comics, one of the two precursors of Marvel Comics
Atlas Seaboard Comics, a short lived comic book company created in 1974
Atlas, a comic book series published by Drawn Quarterly
Atlas, a Marvel Comics character
In Transportation
Atlas (rocket)
Atlas Cheetah and Atlas Oryx, aircraft
Atlas Van Lines
A last name of
Charles Atlas, there are several people who go by this name
Teddy Atlas, boxing trainer of Mike Tyson
Natacha Atlas, a female musician
Atlas is a fictional robot who is the rival of Astro Boy in the 1980 and 2003 animated series named after the latter
Atlas is a fictional character from Marvel Comics, best known as a member of the Thunderbolts (comics)
Other
Atlas (mythology), the Titan of Greek mythology
Atlas mountains
Atlas (architecture), the column
Atlas (topology), a collection of local coordinate charts in mathematics
CF Atlas, a Mexican football team
Atlas Telecom, Romanian communications company
Atlas Economic Research Foundation, an incubator for free market think tanks.
cs:Atlas
da:Atlas
de:Atlas
es:Atlas
fr:Atlas
hr:Atlas
it:Atlante
he:
nl:Atlas
pl:Atlas
pt:Atlas
ru:
sk:Atlas
sl:Atlas
Antiseptic mouth rinse, often called '''mouthwash''', is an oral hygiene product that claims to kill the germs that cause plaque, gingivitis, and bad breath. However, it is generally agreed that the use of mouthwash does not eliminate the need for both brushing and flossing.
Common use involves rinsing one's mouth with about 20 ml (2 3 oz) of mouthwash two times a day after brushing. The mouthwash is typically swished or gargled for about half a minute and then spit out.
Active ingredients in commercial brands of mouthwash can include thymol, eucalyptol, methyl salicylate, menthol, chlorhexidine gluconate, hydrogen peroxide and sometimes enzymes and calcium. Ingredients also include water, sweeteners such as sorbitol and Sodium saccharine, and a significant amount of alcohol (around 20 ). Because of the alcohol content, it is possible to fail a breathalyzer test after rinsing one's mouth. Many newer brands are alcohol free.
A '''salt mouthwash''' is a homemade treatment for mouth infections and is made by dissolving a teaspoon of salt in a cup of warm water.
Category:Dental equipment
zh min nan:Lok chhi chi
fi:Suuvesi
(not in frame) ''Alexander Mosaic'' from Pompeii, from a 3rd century BC original Greek painting, now lost).
'''Alexander the Great''' (in Greek '''''', transliterated ''Megas Alexandros'') (Alexander III of Macedon) was born in Pella, Macedon, in July, 356 BC, died in Babylon, on June 10, 323 BC, King of Macedon 336323 BC, is considered one of the most successful military commanders in world history (if not the greatest), conquering most of the known world before his death. Alexander is also known in the Zoroastrian Middle Persian work ''Arda Wiraz N mag'' as "the accursed Alexander" due to his conquest of the Persian Empire and the destruction of its capital Persepolis. He is also known in Middle Eastern traditions as ''Dhul Qarnayn'' in Arabic and ''Dul Qarnayim'' in Hebrew and Aramaic (the two horned one), apparently due to an image on coins minted during his rule that seemingly depicted him with the two ram's horns of the Egyptian god Ammon. He is known as '''Sikandar''' in Hindi in fact in India, the term Sikandar is used as a synonym for "expert" or "extremely skilled".
Following the unification of the multiple city states of ancient Greece under the rule of his father, Philip II of Macedon, (a labor Alexander had to repeat twice because the southern Greeks rebelled after Philip's death), Alexander conquered the Persian Empire, including Anatolia, Syria, Phoenicia, Gaza, Egypt, Bactria and Mesopotamia and extended the boundaries of his own empire as far as the Punjab. Alexander integrated foreigners (non Macedonians, non Greeks) into his army and administration, leading some scholars to credit him with a "policy of fusion." He encouraged marriage between his army and foreigners, and practiced it himself. After twelve years of constant military campaigning, Alexander died, possibly of malaria, typhoid, viral encephalitis or even a drug overdose. His conquests ushered in centuries of Greek settlement and rule over foreign areas, a period known as the Hellenistic Age. Alexander himself lived on in the history and myth of both Greek and non Greek cultures. Already during his lifetime, and especially after his death, his exploits inspired a literary tradition in which he appears as a towering legendary hero in the tradition of Achilles.
Early life
of Alexander III in the British Museum.
Alexander was the son of King Philip II of Macedon and of Epirote princess Olympias. According to Plutarch (''Alexander'' 3.1,3), Olympias was impregnated not by Philip, who was afraid of her and her affinity for sleeping in the company of snakes, but by Zeus. Plutarch (''Alexander'' 2.2 3) relates that both Philip and Olympias dreamt of their son's future birth. Olympias dreamed of a loud burst of thunder and of lightning striking her womb. In Philip's dream, he sealed her womb with the seal of the lion. Alarmed by this, he consulted the seer Aristander of Telmessus, who determined that his wife was pregnant and that the child would have the character of a lion.
Aristotle was Alexander's tutor he gave Alexander a thorough training in rhetoric and literature and stimulated his interest in science, medicine, and philosophy. After his visit to the Oracle of Ammon at Siwa, according to all five of the extant historians (Arrian, Curtius, Diodorus, Justin, and Plutarch), rumors spread that the Oracle had revealed Alexander's father to be Zeus, rather than Philip. According to Plutarch (''Alexander'' 2.1), his father descended from Heracles through Caranus and his mother descended from Aeacus through Neoptolemus and Achilles. Aristotle gave him a copy of the Illiad and a knife that he always hid under his pillow at night.
The ascent of Macedon
When Philip led an attack on Byzantium in 340 BC, Alexander, aged 16, was left in command of Macedonia. In 339 BC, Philip took a second wife, to the chagrin of Alexander's mother Olympias, which led to a quarrel between Alexander and his father and threw into question Alexander's succession to the Macedonian throne. In 338 BC, Philip created the League of Corinth. Alexander also assisted his father at the decisive battle of Chaeronea in this year. The cavalry wing led by Alexander annihilated the Sacred Band of Thebes, an elite corps previously regarded as invincible. Philip was content to deprive Thebes of her dominion over Boeotia and leave a Macedonian garrison in the citadel.
In 336 BC, Philip was assassinated at the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra to King Alexander of Epirus. The assassin was supposedly a former lover of the king, the disgruntled young nobleman Pausanias, who held a grudge against Philip because the king had ignored a complaint he had expressed. Philip's murder was once thought to have been planned with the knowledge and involvement of Alexander or Olympias. Another possible instigator could have been Darius III, the recently crowned King of Persia. Plutarch mentions an irate letter from Alexander to Darius, where Alexander blames Darius and Bagoas, his grand vizier, for his father's murder, stating that it was Darius who had been bragging with the Greek cities of how he managed to assassinate Philip.
After Philip's death, the army proclaimed Alexander, then aged 20, as the new king of Macedon. Greek cities like Athens and Thebes, which had been forced to pledge allegiance to Philip, saw in the new king an opportunity to retake their full independence. Alexander moved swiftly and Thebes, which had been most active against him, submitted when he appeared at its gates. The assembled Greeks at the Isthmus of Corinth, with the sole exception of the Spartans, elected him to the command against Persia, which had previously been bestowed upon his father.
The next year, (335 BC), Alexander felt free to engage the Thracians and the Illyrians in order to secure the Danube as the northern boundary of the Macedonian kingdom. While he was triumphantly campaigning north, the Thebans and Athenians rebelled once again. Alexander reacted immediately and while the other cities once again hesitated, Thebes decided this time to resist with the utmost vigor. The resistance was useless in the end, the city was conquered with great bloodshed. The Thebans encountered an ever harsher fate when their city was razed to the ground and its territory divided between the other Boeotian cities. Moreover, all of the city's citizens were sold into slavery, sparing only the priests, the leaders of the pro Macedonian party and the descendants of Pindar, whose house was the only one left untouched. The end of Thebes cowed Athens into submission and it readily accepted Alexander's demand for the exile of all the leaders of the anti Macedonian party, Demosthenes first of all.
Period of conquests
The fall of the Persian Empire
Alexander's army had crossed the Hellespont with about 42,000 soldiers primarily Macedonians and Greeks, but also including some Thracians, Paionians and Illyrians. After an initial victory against Persian forces at the Battle of Granicus, Alexander accepted the surrender of the Persian provincial capital and treasury of Sardis and proceeded down the Ionian coast. At Halicarnassus, Alexander successfully waged the first of many sieges, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea. Alexander left Caria in the hands of Ada, who was ruler of Caria before being deposed by her brother Pixodarus. From Halicarnassus, Alexander proceeded into mountainous Lycia and the Pamphylian plain, asserting control over all coastal cities and denying them to his enemy. From Pamphylia onward, the coast held no major ports and so Alexander moved inland. At Termessus, Alexander humbled but did not storm the Pisidian city. At the ancient Phrygian capital of Gordium, Alexander "undid" the tangled Gordian knot, a feat said to await the future "king of Asia." According to the most vivid story, Alexander proclaimed that it did not matter how the knot was undone, and he hacked it apart with his sword. Another version claims that he did not use the sword, but actually figured out how to undo the knot.
, Pompei mosaic.
Alexander's army crossed the Cilician Gates, met and defeated the main Persian army under the command of Darius III at the Battle of Issus in 333 BC. Darius fled this battle in such a panic for his life that he left behind his wife, his children, his mother, and much of his personal treasure. Sisygambis, the queen mother, never forgave Darius for abandoning her. She disowned him and adopted Alexander as her son instead. Proceeding down the Mediterranean coast, he took Tyre and Gaza after famous sieges (see Siege of Tyre). Alexander passed near but probably did not visit Jerusalem.
In 332 BC 331 BC, Alexander was welcomed as a liberator in Egypt and was pronounced the son of Zeus by Egyptian priests of the god Ammon at the Oracle of the god at the Siwa Oasis in the Libyan desert. He founded Alexandria in Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic dynasty after his death. Leaving Egypt, Alexander marched eastward into Assyria (now northern Iraq) and defeated Darius and a third Persian army at the Battle of Gaugamela. Darius was forced to flee the field after his charioteer was killed, and Alexander chased him as far as Arbela. While Darius fled over the mountains to Ecbatana (modern Hamadan), Alexander marched to Babylon.
, at the maximum extent of Alexander's advance in the East ( r mqi, Xinjiang Museum, China) (drawing).
From Babylon, Alexander went to Susa, one of the Achaemenid capitals, and captured its treasury. Sending the bulk of his army to Persepolis, the Persian capital, by the Royal Road, Alexander stormed and captured the Persian Gates (in the modern Zagros Mountains), then sprinted for Persepolis before its treasury could be looted. Alexander allowed the League forces to loot Persepolis. A fire broke out in the eastern palace of Xerxes and spread to the rest of the city. It was not known if it was a drunken accident or a deliberate act of revenge for the burning of the Athenian Acropolis during the Second Persian War. The ''Book of Arda Wiraz'', a Zoroastrian work composed in the 3rd or 4th century AD, also speaks of archives containing "all the Avesta and Zand, written upon prepared cow skins, and with gold ink" that were destroyed but it must be said that this statement is often treated by scholars with a certain measure of skepticism, because it is generally thought that for many centuries the Avesta was transmitted mainly orally by the Magians.
He then set off in pursuit of Darius, who was kidnapped, and then murdered by followers of Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman. Bessus then declared himself Darius' successor as Artaxerxes V and retreated into Central Asia to launch a guerrilla campaign against Alexander. With the death of Darius, Alexander declared the war of vengeance over, and released his Greek and other allies from service in the League campaign (although he allowed those that wished to re enlist as mercenaries in his imperial army).
His three year campaign against first Bessus and then the satrap of Sogdiana, Spitamenes, took him through Media, Parthia, Aria, Drangiana, Arachosia, Bactria, and Scythia. In the process, he captured and refounded Herat and Maracanda. Moreover, he founded a series of new cities, all called Alexandria, including modern Kandahar in Afghanistan, and Alexandria Eschate ("The Furthest") in modern Tajikistan. In the end, both were betrayed by their men, Bessus in 329 BC and Spitamenes the year after.
Hostility toward Alexander
During this time, Alexander adopted some elements of Persian dress and customs at his court, notably the custom of ''proskynesis'', a symbolic kissing of the hand that Persians paid to their social superiors, but a practice of which the Greeks disapproved. The Greeks regarded the gesture as the preserve of deities and believed that Alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it. This cost him much in the sympathies of many of his countrymen. Here, too, a plot against his life was revealed, and his companion Philotas was executed for treason for failing to bring the plot to his attention. Parmenion, Philotas' father, who was at the head of an army at Ecbatana, was assassinated by command of Alexander, who feared that Parmenion might attempt to avenge his son. Several other trials for treason followed, and many Macedonians were executed. Later on, in a drunken quarrel at Maracanda, he also killed the man who had saved his life at Granicus, Clitus the Black. Later in the Central Asian campaign, a second plot against his life, this one by his own pages, was revealed, and his official historian, Callisthenes of Olynthus (who had fallen out of favor with the king by leading the opposition to his attempt to introduce ''proskynesis''), was implicated on what many historians regard as trumped up charges. However, the evidence is strong that Callisthenes, the teacher of the pages, must have been the one who persuaded them to assassinate the king.
The invasion of India
around 323 BC.br
'''Obv:''' Alexander standing, being crowned by Nike, fully armed and holding Zeus' thunderbolt.br
'''Rev:''' Greek rider, possibly Alexander, attacking an Indian battle elephant, possibly fleeing Porus.
With the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana (Roshanak in Bactrian) to cement his relations with his new Central Asian satrapies, in 326 BC Alexander was finally free to turn his attention to India. King Ambhi, ruler of Taxila, surrendered the city to Alexander. Many people had fled to a high fortress called Aornos. Alexander took Aornos by storm. Alexander fought an epic battle against Porus, a ruler of a region in the Punjab in the Battle of Hydaspes in (326 BC). After attaining victory, Alexander made an alliance with Porus and appointed him as satrap of his own kingdom. Alexander then named one of the two new cities that he founded, Bucephala, in honor of his noble mount who had brought him to India. Alexander continued on to conquer all the headwaters of the Indus River.
East of Porus' kingdom, near the Ganges River, was the powerful empire of Magadha ruled by the Nanda dynasty. Fearing the prospects of facing another powerful Indian army and exhausted by years of campaigning, his army mutinied at the Hyphasis (modern Beas), refusing to march further east. Alexander, after the meeting with his officer, Coenus, was convinced that it was better to return. Alexander was forced to turn south, conquering his way down the Indus to the Indian Ocean. He sent much of his army to Carmania (modern southern Iran) with his general Craterus, and commissioned a fleet to explore the Persian Gulf shore under his admiral Nearchus, while he led the rest of his forces back to Persia by the southern route through the Gedrosia (present day Makran in southern Pakistan).
After India
'' by Charles Le Brun, 1673.
Discovering that many of his satraps and military governors had misbehaved in his absence, Alexander executed a number of them as examples on his way to Susa. As a gesture of thanks, he paid off the debts of his soldiers, and announced that he would send those over aged and disabled veterans back to Macedonia under Craterus, but his troops misunderstood his intention and mutinied at the town of Opis, refusing to be sent away and bitterly criticizing his adoption of Persian customs and dress and the introduction of Persian officers and soldiers into Macedonian units. Alexander executed the ringleaders of the mutiny, but forgave the rank and file. In an attempt to craft a lasting harmony between his Macedonian and Persian subjects, he held a mass marriage of his senior officers to Persian and other noblewomen at Opis, but few of those marriages seem to have lasted much beyond a year.
His attempts to merge Persian culture with his Greek soldiers also included training a regiment of Persian boys in the ways of Macedonians. It is not certain that Alexander adopted the Persian royal title of ''shahanshah'' ("great king" or
"king of kings"). However, most historians believe that he did.
Alexander let it be known that he intended to launch a campaign against the tribes of Arabia. After they were subjugated, it was assumed that Alexander would turn westwards and attack Carthage and Italy.
After traveling to Ecbatana to retrieve the bulk of the Persian treasure, his closest friend and possible lover Hephaestion died of an illness. Alexander was distraught and on his return to Babylon, he fell ill and died.
Alexander's marriages and sexuality
Alexander's greatest emotional attachment is generally considered to have been to his companion, cavalry commander (''chiliarchos'') and probable lover, Hephaestion. They had most likely been best friends since childhood for Hephaestion too received his education at the court of Alexander's father. Hephaestion makes his appearance in history at the point when Alexander reaches Troy. There the two friends made sacrifices at the shrines of the two heroes Achilles and Patroclus Alexander honoring Achilles, and Hephaestion honoring Patroclus. As Aelian in his ''Varia Historia'' (12.7) claims, "He thus intimated that he was the object of Alexander's love, as Patroclus was of Achilles." Following Hephaestion's death, Alexander mourned him greatly, and did not eat for days.
Many have discussed Alexander's ambiguous sexuality. Curtius reports that, "He scorned feminine sensual pleasures to such an extent that his mother was anxious lest he be unable to beget offspring." To encourage a relationship with a woman, King Philip and Olympias brought in a high priced Thessalian courtesan named Callixena.
Later in life, Alexander married several princesses of former Persian territories, Roxana of Bactria, Statira, daughter of Darius III, and Parysatis, daughter of Ochus. He fathered two children, (Heracles), born by his concubine Barsine (the daughter of satrap Artabazus of Phrygia) in 327 BC, and Alexander IV of Macedon, born by Roxana shortly after his death in 323 BC.
Curtius maintains that Alexander also took as a lover "Bagoas, a eunuch exceptional in beauty and in the very flower of boyhood, with whom Darius was intimate and with whom Alexander would later be intimate," (VI.5.23). Bagoas is the only one who is actually named as the ''eromenos'' the beloved of Alexander. Their relationship seems to have been well known among the troops, as Plutarch recounts an episode (also mentioned by Dicaearchus) during some festivities on the way back from India) in which his men clamor for him to openly kiss the young man: "Bagoas ... sat down close by him, which so pleased the Macedonians, that they made loud acclamations for him to kiss Bagoas, and never stopped clapping their hands and shouting till Alexander put his arms round him and kissed him." At this point in time, the troops present were all survivors of the crossing of the desert. Bagoas must have endeared himself to them by his courage and fortitude during that harrowing episode. Whatever Alexander's relationship with Bagoas, it was no impediment to relations with his queen: six months after Alexander's death Roxana gave birth to his son and heir, Alexander IV. Besides Bagoas, Curtius mentions yet another possible lover of Alexander, Euxenippus, "whose youthful grace filled him with enthusiasm" (VII.9.19).
Allegations concerning Alexander's sexuality remain highly controversial and excite passions in some quarters. People of various national, ethnic and cultural origins regard him as their hero. Some argue that historical accounts describing Alexander's love for Hephaestion and Bagoas as sexual were written centuries after the fact, and thus it can never be established what the historical relationship between Alexander and his male companions were. Others argue that the same can be said about much of our information regarding Alexander. Such debates, however, are generally considered anachronistic by scholars of the period, who point out that the concept of homosexuality as understood today did not exist in Greco Roman antiquity. Sexual attraction between males was seen as a normal and universal part of human nature since it was believed that men were attracted to beauty, an attribute of the young, regardless of gender. If Alexander's love life was transgressive, it was not for his love of beautiful youths but for his probable involvement with a man his own age, in a time when the standard model of male love was pederastic. See Pederasty in ancient Greece for more information.
The army of Alexander the Great before the Battle of Gaugamela
The army of Alexander was, for the most part, that of his father Philip. It was composed of light and heavy troops and some engineers, medical and staff units. About one third of the army was composed of his Greek allies from the Hellenic League.
Infantry
The main infantry corps was the phalanx, composed of six regiments (''taxies'') numbering about 2000 phalangites each. Each soldier had a long pike called a ''sarissa'', which was up to 21 feet long, and a short sword. For protection, the soldier wore a Phrygian style helmet and a shield. Arrian mentions large shields (the ''aspis''), but this is disputed, as it is difficult to wield both a large pike and a large shield at the same time. Many modern historians claim the phalanx used a smaller shield, called a ''pelta'', the shield used by peltasts. It is unclear whether the phalanx used body armor, but heavy body armor is mentioned in Arrian (1.28.7) and other ancient sources. Modern historians believe most of the phalangites did not wear heavy body armor at the time of Alexander.
Another important unit were the hypaspists (shield bearers), arranged into three battalions (''lochoi'') of 1000 men each. One of the battalions was named the ''Agema'' and served as the King's bodyguards. Their armament is unknown and it is difficult to get a clear picture from ancient sources. Sometimes hypaspists are mentioned in the front line of the battle just between the phalanx and the heavy cavalry. Moreover, they seem to have acted as an extension of the phalanx fighting as heavy infantry while keeping a link between the heavily clad phalangites and the companion cavalry. They also accompanied Alexander on flanking marches and were capable of fighting on rough terrain like light troops so it seems they could perform dual functions.
In addition to the units mentioned above, the army included some 6000 Greek allied and mercenary hoplites, also arranged in phalanxes. They carried a shorter spear, a ''dora'', which was six or seven feet long and a large ''aspis''.
Alexander also had light infantry units composed of peltasts, psiloi and others. Peltasts are considered to be light infantry, although they had a helmet and a small shield and were heavier than the ''psiloi''. The best peltasts were the Agrianians from Thrace.
Cavalry
The heavy cavalry included the Companion cavalry raised from the Macedonian nobility, and the Thessalian cavalry. The Companion cavalry (''hetairoi'', friends) was divided into eight squadrons called ''ile'', 200 strong, except the Royal Squadron of 300. They were equipped with a 12 foot lance, the ''xyston'', and heavy body armor. The horses were partially clad in armor as well. The riders did not carry shields, as the xyston required both hands to wield. The organization of the Thessalian cavalry was similar to the Companion Cavalry, but they had a shorter spear and fought in a looser formation.
Of light cavalry, the ''prodromoi'' (forerunners) secured the wings of the army during battle and went on reconnaissance missions. Several hundred allied horses rounded out the cavalry.
Death
of Alexander the Great.
On the afternoon of June 10 11, 323 BC, Alexander died of a mysterious illness in the palace of Nebuchadrezzar II of Babylon. He was just one month shy of attaining 33 years of age. Various theories have been proposed for the cause of his death which include poisoning by the sons of Antipater or others, sickness that followed a drinking party, or a relapse of the malaria he had contracted in 336 BC.
What is certain is that on May 29, Alexander participated in a banquet organized by his friend Medius of Larissa. After some heavy drinking, immediately or after a bath, he was forced to bed badly ill. The troops started rumors, more and more anxious, and on June 9, the generals decided to let the soldiers see their king alive one last time. They were admitted to his presence one at a time, while the king, too ill to speak, confined himself to move his hand. The day after, Alexander was dead.
The poisoning theory derives from the story held in antiquity by Justin and Curtius. The original story stated that Cassander, son of Antipater, viceroy of Greece, brought the poison to Alexander in Babylon in a mule's hoof, and that Alexander's royal cupbearer, Iollas, brother of Cassander, administered it. Many had powerful motivations for seeing Alexander gone, and were none the worse for it after his death. Deadly agents that could have killed Alexander in one or more doses include hellebore and strychnine. In R. Lane Fox's opinion, the strongest argument against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days had passed between the start of his illness and his death and in the ancient world, such long acting poisons were probably not available (though this discounts the possibility of multiple doses).
However, the warrior culture of Macedon favored the sword over strychnine, and many ancient historians, like Plutarch and Arrian, maintained that Alexander was not poisoned, but died of natural causes. Instead, it is likely that Alexander died of malaria or typhoid fever, which were rampant in ancient Babylon. Other illnesses could have also been the culprit, including acute pancreatitis or the West Nile virus. Recently, theories have been advanced stating that Alexander may have died from the treatment not the disease. Hellebore, believed to have been widely used as a medicine at the time but deadly in large doses, may have been overused by the impatient king to speed his recovery, with deadly results. Disease related theories often cite the fact that Alexander's health had fallen to dangerously low levels after years of heavy drinking and suffering several appalling wounds (including one in India that nearly claimed his life), and that it was only a matter of time before one sickness or another finally killed him.
No story is conclusive. Alexander's death has been reinterpreted many times over the centuries, and each generation offers a new take on it. What is certain is that Alexander died of a high fever on June 10 or 11 of 323 BC. On his death bed, his marshals asked him to whom he bequeathed his kingdom. Since Alexander had only one heir, it was a question of vital importance. He answered famously, "the strongest." Before dying, his final words were "I foresee a great funeral contest over me." Alexander's 'funeral games', where his marshals fought it out over control of his empire, lasted for nearly forty years.
Alexander's death has been surrounded by as much controversy as many of the events of his life. Before long, accusations of foul play were being thrown about by his generals at one another, making it incredibly hard for a modern historian to sort out the propaganda and the half truths from the actual events. No contemporary source can be fully trusted because of the incredible level of self serving recording, and as a result what truly happened to Alexander the Great may never be known.
Alexander's body was placed in a gold anthropid sarcophagus, which was in turn placed in a second gold casket and covered with a purple robe. Alexander's coffin was placed, together with his armor, in a gold carriage which had a vaulted roof supported by an Ionic peristyle. The decoration of the carriage was very rich and is described in great detail by Diodoros.
According to legend, Alexander was preserved in a clay vessel full of honey (which acts as a preservative) and interred in a glass coffin. According to Aelian (''Varia Historia'' 12.64), Ptolemy stole the body and brought it to Alexandria, where it was on display until Late Antiquity. It was here that Ptolemy IX, one of the last successors of Ptolemy I, replaced Alexander's sarcophagus with a glass one, and melted the original down in order to strike emergency gold issues of his coinage. The citizens of Alexandria were outraged at this and soon after Ptolemy IX was killed. Its current whereabouts are unknown.
The so called "Alexander Sarcophagus," discovered near Sidon and now in the Istanbul Archaeological Museum, is now generally thought to be that of Abdylonymus, whom Hephaestion appointed as the king of Sidon by Alexander's order. The sarcophagus depicts Alexander and his companions hunting and in battle with the Persians.
Legacy and division of the empire
inscription.
After Alexander's death, his empire was divided among his officers, mostly with the pretense of first preserving a united kingdom. Later, his officers were focused on the explicit formation of rival monarchies and territorial states.
Ultimately, the conflict was settled after the Battle of Ipsus in Phrygia in 301 BC. Alexander's empire was divided at first into four major portions: Cassander ruled in Macedon, Lysimachus in Thrace, Seleucus in Mesopotamia and Iran, and Ptolemy in the Levant and Egypt. Antigonus ruled for a while in Asia Minor and Syria but was eventually defeated by the other generals at Ipsus (301 BC). Control over Indian territory was short lived when Seleucus was defeated by Chandragupta Maurya, the first Mauryan emperor.
By 270 BC, Hellenistic states consolidated, with:
: The Antigonid Empire centered on Macedon.
: The Seleucid Empire in Asia
: The Ptolemaic kingdom in Egypt, Palestine and Cyrenaica
By the 1st century BC though, most of the Hellenistic territories in the West had been absorbed by the Roman Republic. In the East, they had been dramatically reduced by the expansion of the Parthian Empire and the secession of the Greco Bactrian kingdom.
Alexander's conquests also had long term cultural effects, with the flourishing of Hellenistic civilization throughout the Middle East and Central Asia, and the development of Greco Buddhist art in the Indian subcontinent.
Influence on Ancient Rome
, depicting the marriage of Alexander to Barsine (Stateira) in 324 BC. The couple are apparently dressed as Ares and Aphrodite.
Alexander and his exploits were admired by many Romans who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements, although very little is known about Roman Macedonian diplomatic relations of that time. Julius Caesar wept in Spain at the mere sight of Alexander's statue and Pompey the Great rummaged through the closets of conquered nations for Alexander's 260 year old cloak, which the Roman general then wore as the costume of greatness. However in his zeal to honor Alexander, Octavian Augustus accidentally broke the nose off the Macedonian's mummified corpse while laying a wreath at the hero's shrine in Alexandria, Egypt. The unbalanced emperor Caligula later took the dead king's armor from that tomb and donned it
for luck. The Macriani, a Roman family that rose to the imperial throne in the 3rd century A.D., always kept images of Alexander on their persons, either stamped into their bracelets and rings or stitched into their garments. Even their dinnerware bore Alexander's face, with the story of the king's life displayed around the rims of special bowls.
In the summer of 1995 during the archaeological work of the season centered on excavating the remains of domestic architecture of early Roman date a statue of Alexander was recovered from the structure, which was richly decorated with mosaic and marble pavements and probably was constructed in the 1st century A.D. and occupied until the 3rd century.
Notes
small1 Frank L. Holt. Alexander the Great and the Mystery of the Elephant
Medallions. University of California Press.
small2
General timeline
Alexander's character
, on the waterfront at Thessaloniki, capital of Greek Macedonia.
Modern opinion on Alexander has run the gamut from the idea that he believed he was on a divinely inspired mission to unite the human race, to the view that he was a megalomaniac bent on world domination. Such views tend to be anachronistic, however, and the sources allow for a variety of interpretations. Much about Alexander's personality and aims remains enigmatic.
Alexander is remembered as a legendary hero in Europe and much of both Southwest Asia and Central Asia, where he is known as '''Iskander''' or '''Iskandar Zulkarnain'''. To Zoroastrians, on the other hand, he is remembered as the destroyer of their first great empire and as the leveller of Persepolis. Ancient sources are generally written with an agenda of either glorifying or denigrating the man, making it difficult to evaluate his actual character. Most refer to a growing instability and megalomania in the years following Gaugamela, but it has been suggested that this simply reflects the Greek stereotype of an orientalizing king. The murder of his friend Clitus, which Alexander deeply and immediately regretted, is often cited as a sign of his paranoia, as is his execution of Philotas and his general Parmenion for failure to pass along details of a plot against him. However, this may have been more prudence than paranoia.
Modern Alexandrists continue to debate these same issues, among others, in modern times. One unresolved topic involves whether Alexander was actually attempting to better the world by his conquests, or whether his purpose was primarily to rule the world.
Partially in response to the ubiquity of positive portrayals of Alexander, an alternate character is sometimes presented which emphasizes some of Alexander's negative aspects. Some proponents of this view cite the destructions of Thebes, Tyre, Persepolis, and Gaza as examples of atrocities, and argue that Alexander preferred to fight rather than negotiate. It is further claimed, in response to the view that Alexander was generally tolerant of the cultures of those whom he conquered, that his attempts at cultural fusion were severely practical and that he never actually admired Persian art or culture. To this way of thinking, Alexander was, first and foremost, a general rather than a statesman.
Alexander's character also suffers from the interpretation of historians who themselves are subject to the bias and idealisms of their own time. Good examples are W. W. Tarn, who wrote during the late 19th century and early 20th century, and who saw Alexander in an extremely good light, and Peter Green, who wrote after World War II and for whom Alexander did little that was not inherently selfish or ambition driven. Tarn wrote in an age where world conquest and warrior heroes were acceptable, even encouraged, whereas Green wrote with the backdrop of the Holocaust and nuclear weapons. As a result, Alexander's character is skewed depending on which way the historian's own culture is, and further muddles the debate of who he truly was.
Stories and legends
According to one story, the philosopher Anaxarchus checked the vainglory of Alexander, when he aspired to the honors of divinity, by pointing to Alexander's wound, saying, "See the blood of a mortal, not the ichor of a god." In another version, Alexander himself pointed out the difference in response to a sycophantic soldier. A strong oral tradition, although not attested in any extant primary source, lists Alexander as having epilepsy, known to the Greeks as the Sacred Disease and thought to be a mark of divine favor.
Alexander had a legendary horse named Bucephalus (meaning "ox headed"), supposedly descended from the Mares of Diomedes. Alexander himself, while still a young boy, tamed this horse after experienced horse trainers failed to do so.
There is an apocryphal tale, appearing in a redaction of the pseudo historical Alexander Romance, which details another end for the last true Pharaoh of Egypt. Soon after Alexander's divinity was confirmed by the Oracle of Zeus Ammon, a rumor was begun that Nectanebo II did not travel to Nubia but instead to the court of Philip II of Macedon in the guise of an Egyptian magician. He coupled with Phillip's wife Olympias and from his issue came Alexander. This myth would hold strong appeal for Egyptians who desired continuity in rule and harbored a strong dislike for foreign rule.
Another legend tells of Alexander's campaign down into the Syrian world toward Egypt. On the way, he planned to lay siege to the city of Jerusalem. As the victorious armies of the Greeks approached the city, word was brought to the Jews in Jerusalem that the armies were on their way. The high priest at that time, who was a godly old man by the name of Jaddua (mentioned also in the Bible book of Nehemiah) took the sacred writings of Daniel the prophet and, accompanied by a host of other priests dressed in white garments, went forth and met Alexander some distance outside the city.
All this is from the report of Josephus, the Jewish historian, who tells us that Alexander left his army and hurried to meet this body of priests. When he met them, he told the high priest that he had had a vision the night before in which God had shown him an old man, robed in a white garment, who would show him something of great significance to himself, according to the account, the high priest then opened the prophecies of Daniel and read them to Alexander.
In the prophecies Alexander was able to see the predictions that he would become that notable goat with the horn in his forehead, who would come from the West and smash the power of Persia and conquer the world. He was so overwhelmed by the accuracy of this prophecy and, of course, by the fact that it spoke about him, that he promised that he would save Jerusalem from siege, and sent the high priest back with honors.
Ancient sources
The ancient sources for Alexander's life are, from the perspective of ancient history, relatively numerous. Alexander himself left only a few inscriptions and some letter fragments of dubious authenticity, but a large number of his contemporaries wrote full accounts. The key contemporary historians are considered Callisthenes, his general Ptolemy, Aristobulus, Nearchus and Onesicritus. Another influential account was penned by Cleitarchus, who, while not a direct witness of Alexander's expedition, used the sources which had just been published. His work was to be the backbone of that of Timagenes, who heavily influenced many surviving historians. Unfortunately, all these works were lost. Instead, the modern historian must rely on authors who used these and other early sources.
The five main accounts are by Arrian, Curtius, Plutarch, Diodorus, and Justin.
''Anabasis Alexandri'' (''The Campaigns of Alexander'' in Greek) by the Greek historian Arrian of Nicomedia, writing in the 2nd century AD, and based largely on Ptolemy and, to a lesser extent, Aristobulus and Nearchus. It is considered generally the most trustworthy source.
''Historiae Alexandri Magni'', a biography of Alexander in ten books, of which the last eight survive, by the Roman historian Quintus Curtius Rufus, written in the 1st century AD, and based largely on Cleitarchus through the mediation of Timagenes, with some material probably from Ptolemy
''Life of Alexander'' (see ''Parallel Lives'') and two orations ''On the Fortune or the Virtue of Alexander the Great'' (see ''Moralia''), by the Greek historian and biographer Plutarch of Chaeronea in the second century, based largely on Aristobulus and especially Cleitarchus.
''Bibliotheca historia'' (''Library of world history''), written in Greek by the Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus, from which Book 17 relates the conquests of Alexander, based almost entirely on Timagenes's work. The books immediately before and after, on Philip and Alexander's "Successors," throw light on Alexander's reign.
The ''Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus'' by Justin, which contains factual errors and is highly compressed. It is difficult in this case to understand the source, since we only have an epitome, but it is thought that also Pompeius Trogus may have limited himself to use Timagenes for his Latin history. To these five main sources some like to add the ''Metz Epitome'', an anonymous late Latin work that narrates Alexander's campaigns from Hyrcania to India. Much is also recounted incidentally in other authors, including Strabo, Athenaeus, Polyaenus, Aelian, and others.
The "problem of the sources" is the main concern (and chief delight) of Alexander historians. In effect, each presents a different "Alexander," with details to suit. Arrian is mostly interested in the military aspects, while Curtius veers to a more private and darker Alexander. Plutarch can't resist a good story, light or dark. All, with the possible exception of Arrian, include a considerable level of fantasy, prompting Strabo to remark, "All who wrote about Alexander preferred the marvellous to the true." Nevertheless, the sources tell us much, and leave much to our interpretation and imagination.
Alexander's legend
Alexander was a legend in his own time. His court historian Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis. Writing after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, went so far as to invent a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons. When Onesicritus read this passage to his patron, Alexander's general and later King Lysimachus, Lysimachus reportedly quipped "I wonder where I was at the time."
In the first centuries after Alexander's death, probably in Alexandria, a quantity of the more legendary material coalesced into a text known as the ''Alexander Romance'', later falsely ascribed to the historian Callisthenes and therefore known as ''Pseudo Callisthenes''. This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages, exhibiting a plasticity unseen in "higher" literary forms. Latin and Syriac translations were made in Late Antiquity. From these, versions were developed in all the major languages of Europe and the Middle East, including Armenian, Georgian, Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Hebrew, Serbian, Slavonic, Romanian, Hungarian, German, English, Italian, and French. The "Romance" is regarded by most Western scholars as the source of the account of Alexander given in the Qur'an (Sura ''The Cave''). It is the source of many incidents in Ferdowsi's "Shahnama". A Mongolian version is also extant.
Some believe that, excepting certain religious texts, it is the most widely read work of pre modern times.
Alexander's legend in non Western sources
Alexander was often identified in Persian and Arabic language sources as Dhul Qarnayn, Arabic for the "Two Horned One", possibly a reference to the appearance of a horn headed figure that appears on coins minted during his rule and later imitated in ancient Middle Eastern coinage. If this theory is followed, Islamic accounts of the Alexander legend, particularly in the Qur'an and in Persian legends, combined the Pseudo Callisthenes legendary, pseudo religious material about Alexander. The same legends from the Pseudo Callisthenes were combined in Persia with Sasanid Persian ideas about Alexander in the Iskandarnamah.
Main towns founded by Alexander
Around seventy towns or outposts are claimed to have been founded by Alexander. Some of the main ones are:
Alexandria, Egypt
Alexandria Asiana, Iran
Alexandria in Ariana, Afghanistan
Alexandria of the Caucasus, Afghanistan
Alexandria on the Oxus, Afghanistan
Alexandria of the Arachosians, Afghanistan
Alexandria on the Indus (Alexandria Bucephalous), Pakistan
Alexandria Eschate, "The furthest", Tajikistan
Iskenderun (Alexandretta), Turkey
Kandahar (Alexandropolis), Afghanistan
Alexander in popular media
A 1956 movie starring Richard Burton titled ''Alexander the Great'' was produced by MGM.
A 1941 Hindi movie ''Sikandar'' directed by Sohrab Modi depicts Alexander the Great's Indian conquest.
Bond's 2000 album ''Born'' includes a song titled ''Alexander the Great''.
Oliver Stone's film ''Alexander'', starring Colin Farrell, was released on November 24, 2004.
Baz Luhrmann had been planning to make a very different film about Alexander, starring Leonardo DiCaprio, but the release of Stone's film eventually persuaded him to abandon the project.
Numerous television series about Alexander have been created.
The British heavy metal band Iron Maiden had a song entitled "Alexander the Great" on their album ''Somewhere in Time'' (1986). The song describes Alexander's life, but contains one inaccuracy: in the song it is stated that Alexander's army would not follow him into India.
Brazilian musician Caetano Veloso's 1998 album ''Livro'' includes an epic song about Alexander called "Alexandre."
From 1969 to 1981, Mary Renault wrote a historical fiction trilogy, speculating on the life of Alexander: ''Fire from Heaven'' (about his early life), ''The Persian Boy'' (about his conquest of Persia, his expedition to India, and his death, seen from the viewpoint of a Persian eunuch), and ''Funeral Games'' (about the events following his death). Alexander also appears briefly in Renault's novel ''The Mask of Apollo''. In addition to the fiction, Renault also wrote a non fiction biography, ''The Nature of Alexander''.
A 1965 Hindi movie ''Sikandar e Azam'' directed by Kedar Kapoor starring Dara Singh as Alexandar depicts Alexandar's Indian conquest with Porus.
A further trilogy of novels about Alexander was written in Italian by Valerio Massimo Manfredi and subsequently published in an English translation, entitled ''The Son of the Dream'', ''The Sands of Ammon'' and ''The Ends Of The Earth''.
David Gemmel's "Dark Prince" features Alexander as the chosen vessel for a world destroying demon king. ISBN 0345379101.
Steven Pressfield's 2004 book ''The Virtues of War'' is told from the first person perspective of Alexander.
An epic science fiction animated retelling of the story called ''Reign: The Conqueror'', based on the novel ''Alexander Senki'' by Hiroshi Aramata, with character designs by Peter Chung of ''Aeon Flux'' fame, debuted in Japan in 1997 and on the Cartoon Network's ''Adult Swim'' block variety show in 2003.
Alexander is a character in the computer game Civilization.
The ''Smallville'' season 1 episode "Rogue", Lex Luthor shows Clark Kent the shield that Alexander the Great wore in battle. The shield is gold, with red and blue diamonds (the colors that represent Superman), and a snake shaped like the letter S.
The 1975 film ''The Man Who Would Be King'' starring Sean Connery and Michael Caine is based on the Rudyard Kipling story of two British adventurers who cross the Hindu Kush to the land of Kafiristan, once conquered by Alexander. Daniel (Connery) is believed by the natives to be the return of Alexander and is crowned King.
Notes
Whether the Macedonians of Alexander's time and before were Hellenes (Greeks) is disputed by scholars. The question largely depends on the classification of the Ancient Macedonian language. By separating Macedonians and Greeks in this sentence and others, no position in this debate is implied.
See note 1.
References
Fuller, J.F. C ''A Military History of the Western World: From the earliest times to the Battle of Lepanto'' New York: Da Capo Press, Inc., 1987 and 1988. ISBN 0306803046
De Santis, Marc G. At The Crossroads of Conquest. uMilitary Heritage u. December 2001. Volume 3, No. 3: 46 55, 97 (Alexander the Great, his military, his strategy at the Battle of Gaugamela and his defeat of Darius making Alexander the King of Kings).
External links
'''Primary Sources'''
from Livius.org
Alexander the Great forum, articles, and referenced information.
Wiki Classical Dictionary, and
(in English)
(in English)
(in English)
(in Latin)
from Alexander the Great on the Web: 1,000 resources about Alexander the Great
'''Projects'''
, a comprehensive directory of some 1,000 sites
: an archaeological adventure across Turkey, with travel article and archaeological links
articles on Alexander by Jona Lendering
, a Mediawiki based project, with stricter guidelines and editors
, a site depicting Alexander's coins and later coins featuring Alexander's image
, a site dedicated to Alexander. Features Articles about Alexander, his life, armies, mysteries surrounding his death, and the Hellenistic Period that came after this great Hellenic Leader.
'''Narratives'''
, a project by John J. Popovic
'''Discussion'''
, a forum for Alexander the Great and the history surrounding him.
'''Bibliography'''
by Waldemar Heckel
width "30 " align "center" Preceded by:br '''Philip II'''
width "40 " align "center" '''King of Macedon'''br 336323 BC
width "30 " align "center" rowspan "4" Succeeded by:br '''Philip III Alexander IV'''
width "30 " align "center" rowspan "2" Preceded by:br '''Darius III'''
width "40 " align "center" '''Great King of Media and Persia'''br 330323 BC
width "40 " align "center" '''Pharaoh of Egypt'''br 332323 BC
Category:323 BC deaths
Category:356 BC births
Category:Ancient Greek generals
Category:Ancient Greeks
Category:City founders
Category:Macedonian monarchs
Category:Mummies
Category:Nine Worthies
Category:Pederastic lovers
af:Alexander die Grote
ar:
ast:Aleixandre'l Grande
bg:
bs:Aleksandar Veliki
ca:Alexandre el Gran
cs:Alexandr Velik
da:Alexander den Store
de:Alexander der Gro e
el:
eo:Aleksandro la Granda
es:Alejandro Magno
et:Aleksander Suur
eu:Alexandro Handia
fa:
fi:Aleksanteri Suuri
fr:Alexandre le Grand
fy:Aleksander de Grutte
gl:Alexandre o Grande
he:
hr:Aleksandar Veliki
hu:Nagy S ndor
id:Alexander Agung
is:Alexander mikli
it:Alessandro Magno
ja: 3
ko:
ku:Eskender Mezin
la:Alexander Magnus
lt:Aleksandras Didysis
lv:Aleksandrs Lielais
mk:
nl:Alexander de Grote
no:Aleksander den store
pl:Aleksander Macedo ski
pt:Alexandre, o Grande
ro:Alexandru cel Mare
ru:
scn:Lissandru lu Granni
simple:Alexander the Great
sk:Alexander Ve k
sl:Aleksander Veliki
sq:Leka i Madh
sr:
sv:Alexander den store
tl:Alexander ang Dakila
tr:B y k skender
tt: sk nd r
uk:
zh:
'''Alfred Korzybski''' was born on July 3, 1879 in Warsaw, Poland, and died on March 1, 1950 in Lakeville, Connecticut, USA. He is probably best remembered for developing the theory of general semantics.
Early life and career
He came from an aristocratic family whose members had worked as mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for generations, and he chose to train as an engineer.
Korzybski was educated at the Warsaw University of Technology. During the First World War Korzybski served as an intelligence officer in the Russian Army. After being wounded in his leg and suffering other injuries, he came to North America in 1916 (first to Canada, then the United States) to coordinate the shipment of artillery to the war front. He also lectured to Polish American audiences about the conflict, promoting the sale of war bonds. Following the war, he decided to remain in the United States, becoming a naturalized citizen in 1940. His first book, citeManhood of Humanity cite was published in 1921. In the book, he proposed and explained in detail a new theory of humankind: mankind as a time binding class of life.
General semantics
Korzybski's work culminated in the founding of a discipline that he called general semantics (GS). As Korzybski explicitly said, GS should not be confused with semantics, a different subject. The basic principles of general semantics, which include time binding, are outlined in citeScience and Sanity cite, published in 1933. In 1938 Korzybski founded the Institute of General Semantics and directed it until his death.
In simplified form, the "essence" of Korzybski's work was the claim that human beings are limited in what they know by (1) the structure of their nervous systems, and (2) the structure of their languages. Human beings cannot experience the world directly, but only through their "abstractions" (nonverbal impressions or "gleanings" derived from the nervous system, and verbal indicators expressed and derived from language). Sometimes our perceptions and our languages actually mislead us as to the "facts" with which we must deal. Our understanding of what is going on sometimes lacks ''similarity of structure'' with what is actually going on. He stressed training in awareness of abstracting, using techniques that he had derived from his study of mathematics and science. He called this awareness, this goal of his system, "consciousness of abstracting." His system included modifying the way we approach the world, e.g., with an attitude of "I don't know let's see," to better discover or reflect its realities as shown by modern science. One of these techniques involved becoming inwardly and outwardly quiet, an experience that he called, "silence on the objective levels."
Korzybski and ''to be''
It is often said that Korzybski opposed the use of the verb "to be," an unfortunate exaggeration. He thought that ''certain uses'' of the verb "to be," called the "is of identity" and the "is of predication," were faulty in structure, e.g., a statement such as "Joe is a fool" (said of a person named 'Joe' who has done something that we regard as dumb). Korzybski's remedy was to ''deny'' identity in this example, to be continually aware that 'Joe' is ''not'' what we ''call'' him. We find Joe not in the verbal domain, the world of words, but the nonverbal domain. This was expressed in Korzybski's most famous premise, "the map is not the territory." Note that "the map is not the territory," uses the phrase "is not", a form of the verb "to be." This example shows that he did not intend to abandon the verb as such.
Anecdote about Korzybski
One day, Korzybski was giving a lecture to a group of students, and he suddenly interrupted the lesson in order to retrieve a packet of biscuits, wrapped in white paper, from his briefcase. He muttered that he just had to eat something, and he asked the students on the seats in the front row, if they would also like a biscuit. A few students took a biscuit. "Nice biscuit, don't you think", said Korzybski, while he took a second one. The students were chewing vigorously. Then he tore the white paper from the biscuits, in order to reveal the original packaging. On it was a big picture of a dog's head and the words "Dog Cookies". The students looked at the package, and were shocked. Two of them wanted to throw up, put their hands in front of their mouths, and ran out of the lecture hall to the toilet. "You see, ladies and gentlemen", Korzybski remarked, "I have just demonstrated that people don't just eat food, but also words, and that the taste of the former is often outdone by the taste of the latter." Apparently his prank aimed to illustrate how human suffering originates from the confusion or conflation of linguistic representations of reality and reality itself. (Source: R. Diekstra, ''Haarlemmer Dagblad'', 1993, cited by L. Derks J. Hollander, ''Essenties van NLP'' (Utrecht: Servire, 1996), p. 58).
Impact
Korzybski's work influenced Neuro linguistic programming (especially the metamodel), Gestalt Therapy, Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy and individuals such as Albert Ellis, Gregory Bateson, Buckminster Fuller, Alvin Toffler, Robert A. Heinlein, L. Ron Hubbard, A. E. van Vogt, Robert Anton Wilson, Tommy Hall (lyricist for the 13th Floor Elevators), and scientists such as William Alanson White (psychiatry), and W. Horsley Gantt (a student and colleague of Pavlov).
See also
General Semantics
The map is not the territory
Structural differential
E Prime
Institute of General Semantics
Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture
External links
Further reading
citeManhood of Humanity cite, Alfred Korzybski, forward by Edward Kasner, notes by M. Kendig, Institute of General Semantics, 1950, hardcover, 2nd edition, 391 pages, ISBN 093729800X
citeScience and Sanity An Introduction to Non Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics cite, Alfred Korzybski, Preface by Robert P. Pula, Institute of General Semantics, 1994, hardcover, 5th edition, ISBN 0937298018
''Alfred Korzybski: Collected Writings 1920 1950'', Institute of General Semantics, 1990, hardcover, ISBN: 0685406164
Korzybski, Alfred
Korzybski, Alfred
Korzybski, Alfred
Korybski, Alfred
Category:Neuro Linguistic Programming predecessors
Korzybski, Alfred
Korzybski, Alfred
fr:Alfred Korzybski
nl:Alfred Korzybski
Infobox Arcade Game title Asteroids
image
developer Atari
publisher Atari
designer Lyle Rains and Ed Logg
release 1979
genre Multi directional shooter
modes Up to 2 players, alternating turns
cabinet Upright and cocktail
arcade system
monitor Vector 256 231 (Horizontal) Colors: black and white, Size: 19"
input Five buttons
ports Atari 2600, 5200, 7800, Atari Lynx, PlayStation, Nintendo 64, Windows, Game Boy Color
'''''Asteroids''''' is a popular vector based video arcade game released in 1979 by Atari. The object of the game is for the player to shoot and destroy asteroids without being hit by the fragments. It was one of the most popular and influential games of the Golden Age of Arcade Games.
Description
''Asteroids'' was inspired, in a roundabout way, by the seminal ''Spacewar'', the first computer based video game. In the early 1980s a stand up arcade game version was produced as ''Space Wars'', which included a number of optional versions and added a floating asteroid as a visual device. ''Asteroids'' is essentially a one player version of Spacewar, featuring the "wedge" ship from the original and promoting the asteroids to be the main opponent.
The game was conceived by Lyle Rains and programmed by Ed Logg. ''Asteroids'' was a hit in the United States and became one of Atari's best selling games of all time. Atari had been in the process of releasing a vector beam version of ''Lunar Lander'', but demand for ''Asteroids'' was so high they simply pulled them apart and converted them over. Today the ''Lunar Lander'' version is difficult to find. ''Asteroids'' was so popular that video arcade owners usually had to install larger boxes to hold all the coins this machine raked in.
One feature of the game was the ability for players to record their initials with their high scores, an innovation which is standard in arcade games to this day.
''Asteroids'' was the first of several games to use Atari's "Quadra Scan" vector refresh system (although a raster based full color version was developed for the Atari 2600 home video game system). Later full color Quadra Scan games would include ''Tempest''.
Features
The player's controls consisted of thrust and fire buttons, and rotate left rotate right buttons (actually rotate counterclockwise and rotate clockwise respectively). The momentum of the player's ship was not conserved, and it would start to slow down if thrust was not applied. There was also a hyperspace button, which randomly teleported the player's ship somewhere on the screen, with the risk of exploding upon rematerialization (or rematerializing inside an asteroid).
The player's ship spawned in the middle of the screen, with 4 large asteroids drifting around. Each large asteroid (20 points) would break into 2 medium sized ones (50 points) when shot, which in turn would break into 2 small (100 points) asteroids. The medium and small asteroids, once "spawned", could travel at widely varying speeds. Periodically one of two types of flying saucers ("UFOs") would fly onto the screen: the big one (worth 200 points) would shoot in random directions, while the small one (1000 points) would attempt to aim at the player they tended to appear more often when few asteroids remained on the screen and or the player hadn't shot an asteroid recently. The screen wrapped around, allowing the player's ship, as well as asteroids and shots but not saucers, to fly off the one edge of the screen and reappear on the opposite side. Once a level had been cleared of all asteroids and UFOs, a new set of large asteroids would appear, increasing by 2 each round up to a maximum of 12.
The maximum score possible was 99,990 points, after which it turned back over to zero. A player who desired to get onto the top score list then had to be careful to shoot just enough asteroids UFOs to reach this score without going over (including committing suicide with the last ship left to reach the final total!).
On some early versions of the game it was possible to hide the ship in the score area indefinitely without being hit by asteroids.
Lurking
Soon after the release of ''Asteroids'', some players discovered that small UFOs would be continually sent out when the asteroid count decreased to a certain level. Since these UFOs were worth 1,000 points each a significant sum on this game a strategy known as "lurking" soon developed around this. Players would shoot asteroids until there was only one small or mid sized rock remaining, and then maneuver the ship to a spot approximately one inch from any corner of the screen. Small UFOs would then be ambushed as soon as they emerged (and before they were able to return fire), using wraparound fire if necessary. Because the small UFOs were unable to "lead" the player's ship with their fire (i.e. aiming ahead of the ship's flight path), a clever player could manuever, if necessary, in such a way as to virtually ensure they would never be hit by the small UFO (in fact the large UFO in a sense was seen as more of a threat precisely because of its unpredictable random shots). Since each 10,000 points awarded an extra life, players could continue almost indefinitely once the practice had been mastered. The designers abolished this practice in ''Asteroids Deluxe'' by causing the UFOs to either shoot at the remaining asteroids, thus ending the round, or shoot at the player as soon as they appeared on the screen they also gained the ability to lead the player's ship as well, making them much more dangerous.
However it was also possible to succeed by shooting the asteroids instead a shrewd "asteroid hunting" player would typically attempt to kill all the asteroids "inside" a large one before shooting another asteroid, thus minimizing the amount of "clutter" on the screen.
Technical Description
The ''Asteroids'' arcade machine is a so called vector game. This means that the game graphics are composed entirely of lines which are drawn on a vector monitor. The hardware consists primarily of a standard MOS 6502 CPU, which executes the game program, and the Digital Vector Generator (DVG), vector processing circuitry developed by Atari themselves. As the 6502 by itself was too slow to control both the game play and the vector hardware at the same time, the latter task was delegated to the DVG.
For each picture frame, the 6502 writes graphics commands for the DVG into a defined area of RAM (the vector RAM), and then asks the DVG to draw the corresponding vector image on the screen. The DVG reads the commands and generates appropriate signals for the vector monitor. There are DVG commands for positioning the cathode ray, for drawing a line to a specified destination, calling a subroutine with further commands, and so on.
''Asteroids'' also features various sound effects, each of which is implemented by its own circuitry. The CPU activates these audio circuits (and other hardware components) by writing to special memory addresses (memory mapped ports). The inputs from the player's controls (buttons) are also mapped into the CPU address space
The main ''Asteroids'' game program uses only 4 KB of ROM code. Another 4 KB of vector ROM contain the descriptions of the main graphical elements (rocks, saucer, player's ship, explosion pictures, letters, and digits) in the form of DVG commands.
Legacy
The gameplay in ''Asteroids'' was imitated by many games that followed. For example, one of the objects of ''Sinistar'' is to shoot asteroids in order to get them to release resources which the player needs to collect.
Due to its success, ''Asteroids'' was followed by three sequels:
''Asteroids Deluxe'' (1980)
''Space Duel'' (1982)
''Blasteroids'' (1987)
However, the original game was by far the most popular of the series.
The Killer List of Videogames (KLOV) credits this game as one of the "Top 100 Videogames." Readers of the KLOV credit it as the seventh most popular game.
Ports
Being one of the most popular video games ever, ''Asteroids'' has been ported to multiple systems, including many of Atari's systems (Atari 2600, 5200, 7800, Atari Lynx) and many others. The 2600 port was the first game to utilize a bank switched cartridge, doubling available ROM space. Also, a new version of ''Asteroids'' was developed for PlayStation, Nintendo 64, Windows, and the Game Boy Color in the late 1990s. A port was also included on Atari's Cosmos system, but the system never saw release. Many of the recent TV Games series of old Atari games have included either the 2600 or arcade versions of ''Asteroids''. Atari has also used the game for its other late '90s anthology series. Essentially, if one looks for this game, one will be able to find it somewhere.
In 2005, ''Asteroids'' (Including both Atari 2600 and the arcade original, along with Asteroids Deluxe) were included as part of ''Atari Anthology'' for both XBox and Playstation 2, using Digital Eclipse's emulation technology..
Unofficial clones and variants
There have been countless unofficial versions of ''Asteroids'' produced. These include near copies such as Acornsoft's ''Meteors'', as well as those with expanded gameplay and background, such as ''Stardust'' and ''Starscape''.
Record breaking gameplay
In March 2004, Portland, Oregon resident '''Bill Carlton''' attempted to break the world record for playing an arcade version of ''Asteroids'', playing over 27 hours before his machine malfunctioned, ending his record run. He scored 12.7 million points, putting him in 5th place in the all time ''Asteroids'' rankings. In November 1982 '''Scott Safran''' set the still unbroken record of 41 million points.
Song
In 1982, Buckner and Garcia recorded a song titled "Hyperspace", using sound effects from the game, and released it on the album ''Pac Man Fever''.
External links
, featuring a history of Asteroids
Asteroids game for PC with heavily advanced gameplay.
Category: 1979 computer and video games
Category:1979 arcade games
Category:1981 computer and video games
Category:Atari 2600 games
Category: Atari 5200 games
Category: Atari 7800 games
Category: Atari Lynx games
Category:Atari 8 bit family games
Category: Apple Macintosh games
Category: PlayStation games
Category: PC games
Category: Nintendo 64 games
Category: Game Boy Color games
Category:Shoot 'em ups
Category: Arcade games
Category:Atari arcade games
Category:Vector arcade games
Category: Mobile phone games
de:Asteroids
fr:Asteroids
sv:Asteroids
it:Asteroids
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Asparagales
image Illustration Asparagus officinalis0.jpg
image width 200px
image caption Asparagus officinalis
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Liliopsida
ordo '''Asparagales'''
ordo authority Bromhead
subdivision ranks Families
subdivision
small''according to the br Angiosperm Phylogeny Group'' smallhr
Agapanthaceae
Agavaceae
Alliaceae
Amaryllidaceae
Aphyllanthaceae
Asparagaceae
Asphodelaceae
small(optional synonym of Xanthorrhoeaceae) small
Asteliaceae
Blandfordiaceae
Boryaceae
Doryanthaceae
Hemerocallidaceae
Hyacinthaceae
Hypoxidaceae
Iridaceae
Ixioliriaceae
Lanariaceae
Laxmanniaceae
Orchidaceae
Ruscaceae
Tecophilaeaceae
Themidaceae
Xanthorrhoeaceae
'''Asparagales''' is an order of monocots which includes a number of families of non woody plants. In older classification systems, the families now included in the Asparagales were included in order Liliales, and some genera of which were even included in family Liliaceae. Some classification systems separate some of the families listed below into additional orders, including orders Orchidales and Iridales, while other systems, especially the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group's classification system, include the Orchidales and Iridales within the Asparagales. The order is named after the genus ''Asparagus''.
The Angiosperm Phylogeny Group's classification system is widely used by botanists, and was updated as the APG II in 2002 to include recent findings, especially in DNA analysis. Their 1998 scheme identified 29 families in order Asparagales. The APG II consolidates some families, and recognizes an alternative system of fewer, larger families, in which certain smaller families can be grouped within other larger families based on close genetic affinities and still follow the 'APG system'. Under the new classification system one could, for example, correctly include daylilies (''Hemerocallis'') in family Hemerocallidaceae, or in family Xanthorrhoeaceae. The APG II classification of the Asparagales is as follows:
Alliaceae
Agapanthaceae
Amaryllidaceae
Asparagaceae
Agavaceae
Aphyllanthaceae
Hesperocallidaceae
Hyacinthaceae
Laxmanniaceae
Ruscaceae
Themidaceae
Asteliaceae
Blandfordiaceae
Boryaceae
Doryanthaceae
Hypoxidaceae
Iridaceae
Ixioliriaceae
Lanariaceae
Orchidaceae
Tecophilaeaceae
Xanthorrhoeaceae
Asphodelaceae
Hemerocallidaceae
Classification systems that separate the Asparagales, Orchidales and Iridales are generally organized as follows:
Asparagales, narrow sense
Family Asparagaceae (asparagus family)
Family Alliaceae (onion family)
Chives
Garlic
Onion
Family Agavaceae (agave family)
Agave
Yucca
Family Amaryllidaceae (amaryllis family)
Family Asphodelaceae (asphodel family)
Aloe
Asphodel
Family Hyacinthaceae (hyacinth family)
Bluebell
Hyacinth
''Cetera''
Orchidales
Family Geosiridaceae
Family Burmanniaceae
Family Corsiaceae
Family Orchidaceae (orchid family)
Iridales
Family Iridaceae (Iris family)
Asparagales ''sensu'' Kubitzki (1998)
Orchidaceae
Iridaceae
Doryanthaceae
Lanariaceae
Ixioliriaceae
Hypoxidaceae
Johnsoniaceae
Hemerocallidaceae
Tecophilaeaceae
Blandfordiaceae
Asteliaceae
Boryaceae
Asphodelaceae
Xanthorrhoeaceae
Aphyllanthaceae
Anemarrhenaceae
Amaryllidaceae
Agapanthaceae
Alliaceae
Themidaceae
Asparagaceae
Hyacinthaceae
Lomandraceae
Herreriaceae
Hostaceae
Anthericaceae
Agavaceae
Eriospermaceae
Ruscaceae
Behniaceae
Dracaenaceae
Convallariaceae
Nolinaceae
Reference
Kubitzki, K.:Conspectus of Families treated in this Volume (1998).Kubitzki, K.(Editor): ''The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants'', Vol.3. Springer Verlag. Berlin, Germany. ISBN 3 540 64060 6
External links
in
co:Asparagales
da:Asparges ordenen
de:Spargelartige
es:Asparagales
fr:Asparagales
la:Asparagales
nl:Asparagales
no:Asparagales
pt:Asparagales
ru:Asparagales
fi:Asparagales
sv:Asparagales
zh:
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Alismatids
image Lemna trisulca0.jpg
image width 250px
image caption Ivy Duckweed (''Lemna trisulca'')
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Liliopsida
ordo '''Alismatales''' smallDumort. (1829) small
subdivision ranks Families
subdivision
Alismataceaebr
Aponogetonaceaebr
Araceaebr
Butomaceaebr
Cymodoceaceaebr
Hydrocharitaceaebr
Juncaginaceaebr
Limnocharitaceaebr
Posidoniaceaebr
Potamogetonaceaebr
Ruppiaceaebr
Scheuchzeriaceaebr
Tofieldiaceaebr
Zosteraceae
The order '''Alismatales''' contains the alismatids, a group of monocotyledons (class Liliopsida). The order contains about 165 genera in 14 families, with cosmopolitic distribution. Most families are comprised of herbaceous non succulent plants. These plants are commonly found in aquatic environmments. The flowers are usually arranged in inflorescences, and the mature seeds lack endosperm.
Traditionally, the order Alismatales was restricted to contain just three families (Alismataceae, Butomaceae and Limnocharitaceae). The other families were not considered as alismatids, and were assigned to various distinct orders, but this approach produced polyphyletic groups, and so the whole group of families is now placed into a single order.
The Petrosaviaceae have been placed in this order, but their actual affinity is not so clear. The alismatids have been considered the sister group of the Arales and the latter are now included here. As a result of this merger, the Araceae became the most important family in the order, accounting alone for over 2000 species in about 100 genera. The rest of families contain together just about 500 species.
See also
Seagrass
References
B. C. J. du Mortier (1829). ''Analyse des Familles de Plantes : avec l'indication des principaux genres qui s'y rattachent'', 54. Imprimerie de J. Casterman, Tournay.
W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue (2002). ''Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition.'' pp. 242 247 (Alismatales). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. ISBN 0878934030.
da:Skeblad ordenen
de:Froschl ffelartige
es:Alismatales
fr:Alismatales
it:Alismatales
he: ( )
nl:Alismatales
no:Alismatales
pl: abie cowce
pt:Alismatales
fi:Alismatales
sv:Alismatales
zh:
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Apiales
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Magnoliopsida
ordo '''Apiales'''
ordo authority Nakai
subdivision ranks Families
subdivision
Apiaceae (carrot family)
Araliaceae (ginseng family)
Pittosporaceae
Griseliniaceae
Torriceliaceae
The '''Apiales''' are an order of flowering plants. The families given at right are typical of newer classifications, though there is some slight variation, and in particular the Torriceliaceae may be divided. These families are placed within the asterid group of dicotyledons.
Under the older Cronquist system, only the Apiaceae and Araliaceae were included here, and the restricted order was placed among the rosids rather than the asterids. The Pittosporaceae were placed within the Rosales, and the other forms within the family Cornaceae.
Category:Apiales
da:Sk rmplante ordenen
de:Doldenbl tlerartige
es:Araliales
fr:Apiales
la:Apiales
nl:Apiales
ja:
no:Apiales
pl:Selerowce
fi:Apiales
zh:
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Asterales
image A sunflower.jpg
image width 200px
image caption ''Helianthus annuus''
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Magnoliopsida
ordo '''Asterales''' smallLindl. (1833) small
subdivision ranks Families
subdivision
Alseuosmiaceae
Argophyllaceae
Asteraceae Daisies
Calyceraceae
Campanulaceae (incl. Lobeliaceae) Bellflowers
Goodeniaceae
Menyanthaceae
Pentaphragmaceae
Phellinaceae
Rousseaceae (incl. Carpodetaceae)
Stylidiaceae (also Donatiaceae)
The '''Asterales''' are an order of dicotyledonous flowering plants which include the composite family Asteraceae (sunflowers and daisies) and its related families.
The order is cosmopolitic, and includes mostly herbaceous species, although a small number of trees (''Lobelia'') and shrubs is also present.
The Asterales can be characterized on the morphological and molecular level. Synapomorphies include the oligosaccharide inulin as the nutrients storage, and the stamens are usually aggregated densely around the style or even are fused into a tube around it. The last property is probably associated with the plunger (or secondary) pollination, which is common among the families of the order.
Families
The '''Asterales''' include about eleven families, the largest of which is Asteraceae with about 25,000 species, and Campanulaceae with about 2,000 species. The remaining families count together for less than 500 species. The two large families are cosmopolitic with center of mass in the northern hemisphere, and the smaller ones are usually confined to Australia and the adjacent areas, or sometimes the South America.
Under the Cronquist system, Asteraceae was the only family in the group, but newer systems (e. g. APG II) have expanded it.
Evolution and biogeography
The Asterales order probably originated in Cretaceous on the supercontinent Gondwana, in the area which is now Australia and Asia. Although most extant species are herbaceous, the examination of the basal families in the order suggests that the common ancestor of the order was an arborescent plant.
Fossil evidence of the Asterales is rare and belongs to rather recent epoques, so the precise estimation of the order's age is quite difficult. An Oligocene pollen is known for Asteraceae and Goodeniaceae, and seeds from Oligocene and Miocene are known for Menyanthaceae and Campanulaceae respectively.
(Bremer and Gustafsson, 1997)
Economical importance
The Asteraceae include some species grown for food, e. g. sunflower (''Helianthus annuus'') or chicory (''Cichorium''). Many spices and medicinal herbs are also present.
Of horticultural importance are the Asteraceae (e. g. chrysanthemum) and Campanulaceae.
References
K. Bremer, M. H. G. Gustafsson (1997). East Gondwana ancestry of the sunflower alliance of families. ''Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A.'' '''94''', 9188 9190. (Available online: )
W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue (2002). ''Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition.'' pp. 476 486 (Asterales). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. ISBN 0878934030.
J. Lindley (1833). ''Nixus Plantarum'', 20. Londini.
Smissen, R. D. (December 2002). Asterales (Sunflower). In: ''Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences''. Nature Publishing Group, London. (Available online: )
da:Kurvblomst ordenen
de:Asternartige
es:Asterales
fr:Asterales
he:
la:Asterales
nl:Asterales
ja:
no:Asterales
pl:Astrowce
pt:Asterales
fi:Asterales
sv:Asterales
zh:
:''This page is about the astronomical body ''Asteroid''. For the arcade game, see Asteroids''.
An '''asteroid''' is a small, solid object in our Solar System, orbiting the Sun. An asteroid is an example of a minor planet (or '''planetoid'''), which are much smaller than planets. Most asteroids are believed to be remnants of the protoplanetary disc which were not incorporated into planets during the system's formation due to excessive gravitational perturbations by Jupiter. Some asteroids have moons. The vast majority of the asteroids are within the main asteroid belt, with elliptical orbits between those of Mars and Jupiter. thumb right 250px This picture of 433 Eros shows the view looking from one end of the asteroid across the gouge on its underside and toward the opposite end. Features as small as 35 m across can be seen.
Asteroids in the solar system
, 1 Ceres, Earth's Moon.
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been discovered within the solar system, and the present rate of discovery is about 5000 per month. As of February 23, 2006, from a total of 325,627 ! astorb.dat record count registered minor planets, 120,437 have orbits known well enough to be given permanent official numbers. Of these, 12890! using http: cfa www.harvard.edu iau lists MPNames.html have official names (trivia: at least 610 of these names require diacritics). The lowest numbered but unnamed minor planet is (3360) 1981 VA the highest numbered named minor planet is 117506 Wildberg .
Current estimates put the total number of asteroids in the solar system at several million. The largest asteroid in the inner solar system is 1 Ceres, with a diameter of 900 1000 km. Two other large inner solar system belt asteroids are 2 Pallas and 4 Vesta both have diameters of 500 km. Vesta is the only main belt asteroid that is sometimes visible to the naked eye (in some very rare occasions, a near Earth asteroid may be visible without technical aid see 99942 Apophis).
The mass of all the asteroids of the Main Belt is estimated to be about 2.3x10sup21 supkg, or about 3 of the mass of our moon. Of this, 1 Ceres comprises 940 to 950x10sup18 supkg, some 40 of the total. Adding in the next three most massive asteroids, 4 Vesta (12 ), 2 Pallas (9 ), and 10 Hygiea (4 ), bring this figure up 66 while the three after that, 511 Davida (1.6 ), 704 Interamnia (1.4 ), and 3 Juno (1.2 ), only add another 4 to the total mass. The number of asteroids then increases exponentially as their individual masses decrease.
See also a List of noteworthy asteroids in our Solar System, or a sequentially ordered List of asteroids.
Asteroid classification
Asteroids are commonly classified into groups based on the characteristics of their orbits and on the details of the spectrum of sunlight they reflect.
Orbit groups and families
:''main articles: asteroid family and minor planet''
Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics. It is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered. Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are much "tighter" and result from the catastrophic break up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past.
For a full listing of known asteroid groups and families, see minor planet and asteroid family.
Spectral classification
, a C type asteroid.
In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on colour, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by Clark R. Chapman, David Morrison, and Ben Zellner. These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroid's surface material. Originally, they classified only three types of asteroids:
C type asteroids carbonaceous, 75 of known asteroids
S type asteroids silicaceous, 17 of known asteroids
M type asteroids metallic, most of the remaining asteroids
This list has since been expanded to include a number of other asteroid types. The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied. See Asteroid spectral types for more detail or :Category:Asteroid spectral classes for a list.
Note that the proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.
Problems with spectral classification
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroid's composition:
C Carbonaceous
S Silicaceous
M Metallic
However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and there are a variety of classifications in use. This has led to significant confusion. While asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of similar materials.
At present, the spectral classification based on several coarse resolution spectroscopic surveys in the 1990s is still the standard. Scientists have been unable to agree on a better taxonomic system, largely due to the difficulty of obtaining detailed measurements consistently for a large sample of asteroids (e.g. finer resolution spectra, or non spectral data such as densities would be very useful).
Asteroid discovery
Historical discovery methods
Asteroid discovery methods have drastically improved over the past two centuries.
In the last years of the 18th century, Baron Franz Xaver von Zach organized a group of 24 astronomers to search the sky for the "missing planet" predicted at about 2.8 AU from the Sun by the Titius Bode law, partly as a consequence of the discovery, by Sir William Herschel in 1781, of the planet Uranus at the distance "predicted" by the law. This task required that hand drawn sky charts be prepared for all stars in the zodiacal band down to an agreed upon limit of faintness. On subsequent nights, the sky would be charted again and any moving object would, hopefully, be spotted. The expected motion of the missing planet was about 30 seconds of arc per hour, readily discernable by observers.
Ironically, the first asteroid, 1 Ceres, was not discovered by a member of the group, but rather by accident in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi director, at the time, of the observatory of Palermo, in Sicily. He discovered a new star like object in Taurus and followed the displacement of this object during several nights. His colleague, Carl Friedrich Gauss, used these observations to determine the exact distance from this unknown object to the Earth. Gauss' calculations placed the object between the planets Mars and Jupiter. Piazzi named it after Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture.
Three other asteroids (2 Pallas, 3 Juno, 4 Vesta) were discovered over the next few years, with Vesta found in 1807. After eight more years of fruitless searches, most astronomers assumed that there were no more and abandoned any further searches.
However, Karl Ludwig Hencke persisted, and began searching for more asteroids in 1830. Fifteen years later, he found 5 Astraea, the first new asteroid in 38 years. He also found 6 Hebe less than two years later. After this, other astronomers joined in the search and at least one new asteroid was discovered every year after that (except the wartime year 1945). Notable asteroid hunters of this early era were J. R. Hind, Annibale de Gasparis, Robert Luther, H. M. S. Goldschmidt, Jean Chacornac, James Ferguson, Norman Robert Pogson, E. W. Tempel, J. C. Watson, C. H. F. Peters, A. Borrelly, J. Palisa, Paul Henry and Prosper Henry and Auguste Charlois.
In 1891, however, Max Wolf pioneered the use of astrophotography to detect asteroids, which appeared as short streaks on long exposure photographic plates. This drastically increased the rate of detection compared with previous visual methods: Wolf alone discovered 248 asteroids, beginning with 323 Brucia, whereas only slightly more than 300 had been discovered up to that point. Still, a century later, only a few thousand asteroids were identified, numbered and named. It was known that there were many more, but most astronomers did not bother with them, calling them "vermin of the skies".
Modern discovery methods
Until 1998, asteroids were discovered by a four step process. First, a region of the sky was photographed by a wide field telescope. Pairs of photographs were taken, typically one hour apart. Multiple pairs could be taken over a series of days. Second, the two films of the same region were viewed under a stereoscope. Any body in orbit around the Sun would move slightly between the pair of films. Under the stereoscope, the image of the body would appear to float slightly above the background of stars. Third, once a moving body was identified, its location would be measured precisely using a digitizing microscope. The location would be measured relative to known star locations .
These first three steps do not constitute asteroid discovery: the observer has only found an apparition, which gets a provisional designation, made up of the year of discovery, a code of two letters representing the week of discovery, and of a number so more than the one discovered one took place in this week (example: 1998 FJ74).
The final step of discovery is to send the locations and time of observations to Brian Marsden of the Minor Planet Center. Dr. Marsden has computer programs that compute whether an apparition ties together previous apparitions into a single orbit. If so, the object gets a number. The observer of the first apparition with a calculated orbit is declared the discoverer, and he gets the honour of naming the asteroid (subject to the approval of the International Astronomical Union) once it is numbered.
Latest technology: detecting hazardous asteroids
There is increasing interest in identifying asteroids whose orbits cross Earth's orbit, and that could, given enough time, collide with Earth (see Earth crosser asteroids). The three most important groups of near Earth asteroids are the Apollos, Amors, and the Atens. Various asteroid deflection strategies have been proposed.
The near Earth asteroid 433 Eros had been discovered as long ago as 1898, and the 1930s brought a flurry of similar objects. In order of discovery, these were: 1221 Amor, 1862 Apollo, 2101 Adonis, and finally 69230 Hermes, which approached within 0.005 AU of the Earth in 1937. Astronomers began to realize the possibilities of Earth impact.
Two events in later decades increased the level of alarm: the increasing acceptance of Walter Alvarez' theory of dinosaur extinction being due to an impact event, and the 1994 observation of Comet Shoemaker Levy 9 crashing into Jupiter. The U.S. military also declassified the information that its military satellites, built to detect nuclear explosions, had detected hundreds of upper atmosphere impacts by objects ranging from one to 10 metres across.
All of these considerations helped spur the launch of highly efficient automated systems that consist of Charge Coupled Device (CCD) cameras and computers directly connected to telescopes. Since 1998, a large majority of the asteroids have been discovered by such automated systems. A list of teams using such automated systems includes :
The Lincoln Near Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) team
The Near Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT) team
Spacewatch
The Lowell Observatory Near Earth Object Search (LONEOS) team
The Catalina Sky Survey (CSS)
The Campo Imperatore Near Earth Objects Survey (CINEOS) team
The Japanese Spaceguard Association
The Asiago DLR Asteroid Survey (ADAS)
The LINEAR system alone has discovered 62,283 asteroids as of December 14, 2005 including over 600 more than 1 km in diameter.
Naming asteroids
The naming format
Newly discovered asteroids are given a provisional designation consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code, such as 2001 FH. When its orbit is confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g. 1 Ceres). The formal naming convention uses parentheses around the number (e.g. ''(433) Eros''), however, dropping the parentheses is quite common. Informally, especially when a name is repeated in running text, it is common to drop the number altogether, or to drop it after the first mention.
The Minor Planet Circular (MPC) of October 19, 2005 was a historical one, as it saw the highest numbered asteroid jump from 99947 to 118161, causing a small "Y2k" like crisis for various automated data services up until then, only five digits were allowed in most data formats for the asteroid number. This has been addressed in some data fields by having the leftmost digit, the ten thousands place, use the alphabet as a digit extension. A 10, B 11, , Z 35, a 36, , z 61. The highest number 120437 thus is cross referenced as C0437 on some lists. Also, the fictional asteroid of ''The Little Prince'', '''B612''', now could be connected with the real (110612) 2001 TAsub142 sub which is listed as (B0612) 2001 TAsub142 sub in the compacted lists although it is already present as 46610 B sixdouze (B612 in hexadecimal translates to 46610 in decimal notation).
Unnamed asteroids
Unnamed asteroids that have been given a number keep their provisional designation, e.g. (29075) 1950 DA.
As modern discovery techniques have discovered vast numbers of new asteroids, they are increasingly being left unnamed. The first asteroid to be left unnamed was (3360) 1981 VA. On rare occasions, an asteroid's provisional designation may become used as a name in itself: the still unnamed (15760) 1992 QB gave its name to a group of asteroids which became known as cubewanos.
Sources for names
The first few asteroids were named after figures from Graeco Roman mythology, but as such names started to run out, others were used famous people, literary characters, the names of the discoverer's wives, children, and even television characters.
The first asteroid to be given a non mythological name was 20 Massalia, named after the city of Marseilles. For some time only female (or feminized) names were used Alexander von Humboldt was the first man to have an asteroid named after him, but his name was feminized to 54 Alexandra. This unspoken tradition lasted until 334 Chicago was named even then, oddly feminised names show up in the list for years afterward.
As the number of asteroids began to run into the hundreds, and eventually the thousands, discoverers began to give them increasingly frivolous names. The first hints of this were 482 Petrina and 483 Seppina, named after the discoverer's pet dogs. However, there was little controversy about this until 1971, upon the naming of 2309 Mr. Spock (which was not even named after the ''Star Trek'' character, but after the discoverer's cat who supposedly bore a resemblance to him). Although the IAU subsequently banned pet names as sources, eccentric asteroid names are still being proposed and accepted, such as 6042 Cheshirecat, 9007 James Bond, or 26858 Misterrogers.
For a full list, see meanings of asteroid names.
Special naming rules
Asteroid naming is not always a free for all: there are some types of asteroid for which rules have developed about the sources of names. For instance Centaurs (asteroids orbiting between Saturn and Neptune) are all named after mythological centaurs, Trojans after heroes from the Trojan War, and trans Neptunian objects after underworld spirits.
Asteroid symbols
The first few asteroids discovered were assigned symbols like the ones traditionally used to designate Earth, the Moon, the Sun and planets. The symbols quickly became ungainly, hard to draw and recognise. By the end of 1851 there were 15 known asteroids, each (except one) with its own symbol. The first four's main variants are shown here:
:1 Ceres
:2 Pallas
:3 Juno
:4 Vesta
Johann Franz Encke made a major change in the ''Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch'' (BAJ, "Berlin Astronomical Yearbook") for 1854. He introduced encircled numbers instead of symbols, although his numbering began with Astraea, the first four asteroids continuing to be denoted by their traditional symbols. This symbolic innovation was adopted very quickly by the astronomical community. The following year (1855), Astraea's number was bumped up to 5, but Ceres through Vesta would be listed by their numbers only in the 1867 edition. A few more asteroids (28 Bellona, 35 Leukothea, and 37 Fides) would be given symbols as well as using the numbering scheme.
The circle would become a pair of parentheses, and the parentheses sometimes omitted altogether over the next few decades.
For details, see James L. Hilton, 2001, .
Asteroid exploration
Until the age of space travel, asteroids were merely pinpricks of light in even the largest telescopes and their shapes and terrain remained a mystery.
The first close up photographs of asteroid like objects were taken in 1971 when the Mariner 9 probe imaged Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, which are probably captured asteroids. These images revealed the irregular, potato like shapes of most asteroids, as did subsequent images from the Voyager probes of the small moons of the gas giants.
, the first asteroid to be imaged in close up.
The first true asteroid to be photographed in close up was 951 Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by 243 Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the Galileo probe ''en route'' to Jupiter.
The first dedicated asteroid probe was NEAR Shoemaker, which photographed 253 Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around 433 Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001.
Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft ''en route'' to other destinations include 9969 Braille (by Deep Space 1 in 1999), and 5535 Annefrank (by Stardust in 2002).
In September 2005, the Japanese Hayabusa probe started studying 25143 Itokawa in detail and will return samples of its surface to earth. Following that, the next asteroid encounters will involve the European Rosetta probe (launched in 2004), which will study 2867 teins and 21 Lutetia in 2008 and 2010.
As a consequence of cost overruns and technical problems, NASA cancelled its Dawn Mission in March, 2006. Dawn was originally scheduled to launch June 2006 (later rescheduled for 2007) and was to orbit both 1 Ceres and 4 Vesta in 2011 2015.
It has been suggested that asteroids might be used in the future as a source of materials which may be rare or exhausted on earth (asteroid mining).
Asteroids in fiction and film
Understandably, most fictional depictions of asteroids focus on their potential risk of striking Earth. Representations of the asteroid belt in film tend to make it unrealistically cluttered with dangerous rocks in reality asteroids, even in the main belt, are spaced extremely far apart.
Professor Moriarty, Sherlock Holmes' arch enemy, "is the celebrated author of'' "The Dynamics of an Asteroid"'', a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of pure mathematics that it is said that there was no man in the scientific press capable of criticizing it" (The Valley of Fear, 1914, set in 1888).
In ''The Little Prince'', a 1943 novel by Antoine de Saint Exup ry, the title character lives on an asteroid named "B 6 12". The asteroid moon Petit Prince was named after the character, and 46610 B sixdouze after his asteroid.
'Catch that Rabbit', one of the short stories in Isaac Asimov's collection ''I, Robot'' (1950), takes place on an asteroid, while ''Marooned Off Vesta,'' Asimov's first published story, concerns the plight of a group of astronauts stranded in orbit around the asteroid 4 Vesta.
The Japanese science fiction film ''The Mysterians'' aka ''Chikyu Boeigun'' (1957) reveals the solar system's asteroid belt as the remnants of the Mysterian's home planet, Mysteroid, after a nuclear war broke out.
In ''Green Slime'' (1968), a masterpiece of B movies, a rogue asteroid hurtles toward Earth. The astronauts leave Space Station Gamma 3 and place bombs on the asteroid, finding it inhabited by strange blobs of glowing slime that are drawn to the equipment. Unfortunately for everyone some of the slime was carried back on a space suit and soon evolves into tentacled creatures! See the review: . The movie inspired the classic board game ''Awful Green Things from Outer Space''.
In the classic science fiction movie ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' (1968), the ''Discovery'' has a scientifically accurate "close approach" by a binary asteroid whilst en route to Jupiter. The scene simply cuts briefly to two lone rocks passing by the ship, with tens of thousands of kilometres to spare.
In James P. Hogan's ''Inherit the Stars'' (1977), first book of the ''Gentle Giants'' series, Minerva was a planet that exploded to form the asteroid belt 50,000 years ago.
The disaster movie ''Meteor'' (1979) depicts an asteroid named Orpheus hurtling toward Earth after its orbit is deflected by a comet.
Atari released the arcade game Asteroids in 1979.
In ''The Empire Strikes Back'' (1980), Han Solo enters an asteroid field to flee from the Imperial fleet, and C 3PO thinks it is a bad idea. Han then hides his ship, the ''Millennium Falcon'' inside a giant asteroid The ship is then attacked by a vast monster that lives (inexplicably) within the asteroid in the vacuum of space.
In Orson Scott Card's ''Ender's Game'' (1985), a school on 433 Eros is dedicated to children learning to become fleet commanders.
Arthur C. Clarke's novel ''2061: Odyssey Three'' (1986) depicts a journey through the asteroid belt and its ominous parallels with the journey of the ''RMS Titanic''.
L. Neil Smith's novel ''Pallas'' (Tor Books, 1993) depicts a modernized hunting based life on the terraformed asteroid Pallas and introduces Emerson Ngu. The book was partly insired by the 1987 article "The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race" written by Jared Diamond. The book also includes a brief description of a way to encapsulate the entire surface of a small body such as an asteroid to enable creating an Earthlike environment.
Arthur C. Clarke's novel ''The Hammer of God'' (1993) depicts mankind's efforts to stop an asteroid named Kali from hitting the Earth. The film ''Deep Impact'' (1998) was based on Clarke's novel, although in the movie, the asteroid becomes a comet.
In the LucasArts game ''The Dig'' (originally released in 1995) and its novelization, the impact threatening asteroid Attila turns out to be an alien probe.
In the 1998 movie ''Starship Troopers'', aliens launch an asteroid at Earth, completely wiping out Buenos Aires. This is the opening move in the war.
The film ''Armageddon'' (1998) is also about efforts to stop an asteroid hitting Earth. Its representation of an asteroid (and of space travel in general) is deeply unrealistic.
Ben Bova's novel series ''The Asteroid Wars'' (2001 2004) focuses on a war over the mining of the asteroid belt.
In the BBC drama documentary ''Space Odyssey: Voyage to the Planets'' (2004), the ''Pegasus'' encounters a binary asteroid from much closer than expected, and dubs the rocks "Hubris" and "Catastrophe" as a result.
An episode of the political television drama, ''The West Wing'' entitled "Impact Winter" included a subplot in which the White House staff prepared for a possible asteroid strike on the Earth. (First broadcast on December 15, 2004).
See also
List of noteworthy asteroids
List of asteroids
List of asteroids named after important people
List of asteroids named after places
Meanings of asteroid names
Near Earth object
Minor planet
Asteroid belt
Pronunciation of asteroid names
Minor Planet Center
Asteroid groups and families
Asteroids
References
McSween and McSween, ''Meteorites and Their Parent Planets'', ISBN 0521587514
External links
(Minor Planet Center)
(Institute of Applied Astronomy) ('''Warning:''' some ''designation'' here might be incorrect)
Up to date osculating orbital elements and proper orbital elements.
, translation Richard Miles.
br clear "all"
center''(asteroid navigator) First asteroid ...'' center
bg:
ca:Asteroide
cs:Asteroid
da:Sm planet
de:Asteroid
et:Asteroid
es:Asteroide
eo:Asteroido
fr:Ast ro de
gl:Asteroide
ko:
io:Asteroido zono
id:Asteroid
it:Asteroide
he:
la:Asteroides
ms:Asteroid
nl:Planeto de
ja:
lt:Asteroidas
lv:Astero ds
no:Asteroide
nn:Asteroide
pam:Asteroid
pl:Planetoida
pt:Aster ide
ro:Asteroid
ru:
scn:Astiroidi
simple:Asteroid
sk:Asteroid
sl:Asteroid
sr:
fi:Asteroidi
sv:Asteroid
tl:Asteroyd
tt:Asteroidlar
th:
tr:Asteroit
zh:
zh min nan:Si he k chhe
Generally, '''to allocute''' means "to speak out formally." In the field of apologetics, allocution is generally done in defense of a belief. In politics, one may allocute before a legislative body in an effort to influence their position on an issue. In law, it is generally meant to state specifically and in detail what one did nowikiand or nowiki why, often in relation to commission of a crime.
In most jurisdictions, a defendant is allowed the opportunity to allocute that is, explain himself, before sentence is passed. Some jurisdictions hold this as an absolute right, and in its absence, a sentence may potentially be overturned, with the result that a new sentencing hearing must be held.
Allocution is sometimes required of a defendant who pleads guilty to a crime in a plea bargain in exchange for a reduced sentence. In this instance, allocution can serve to provide closure for victims or their families. In principle, it removes any doubt as to the exact nature of the defendant's guilt in the matter. However, there have been many cases in which the defendant allocuted to a crime that he did not commit, often because this is a requirement to receiving a lesser sentence.
The term "allocution" is generally only in use in jurisdictions in the United States, though there are similar processes in other nations.
See also
Confession
Category:Law
An '''affidavit''' is a formal sworn statement of fact, written down, signed, and witnessed (as to the veracity of the signature) by a taker of oaths, such as a notary public. The name is Medieval Latin for ''he has declared upon oath''.
One use of affidavits is to allow evidence to be gathered from witnesses or participants that may not be available to testify in person before the court.
In American jurisprudence, it is very unusual to allow an unsupported affidavit to be entered into evidence (as the person sworn in the affidavit is not subject to cross examination) with regard to material facts which may be dispositive of the matter at bar. Affidavits from persons who are dead or otherwise incapacitated, or who cannot be located or made to appear may be accepted by the court, but usually only in the presence of corroborating evidence. A formerly written affidavit, which reflected a better grasp of the facts closer in time to the actual events, may be used to refresh a witness' recollection. Materials used to refresh recollection are admissible as evidence.
Some types of motions will not be accepted by a court unless accompanied by an independent sworn statement or other evidence, in support of the need for the motion. In such a case, the court will accept an affidavit from the filing attorney in support of the motion, as certain assumptions are made, to wit: The affidavit in place of sworn testimony promotes judicial economy. The lawyer is an officer of the court and knows that a false swearing by him, if found out, could be grounds for severe penalty up to and including disbarment. The lawyer if called upon would be able to present independent and more detailed evidence to prove the facts set forth in his affidavit.
In the United Kingdom
Affidavits are made by writing "I (state full name) of (insert address)on this date (date in words) make oath and say as follows...". After this has been written, the facts to be sworn are listed, in pros or in bullet points. The document is then taken to a commisssioner for oaths (most solicitors are also commissioners for oaths). They will then ask you to swear on a holy book particular to your faith (The New Testament, The Old Testament, the Qur'an, etc) and ask you to verify what has been stated.
An Affidavit is of equivalent value to sworn testimony.
Category:Evidence
Category:Legal documents
de:Versicherung an Eides Statt
he:
REDIRECT Alzheimer's disease
:''For other uses, see Aries (disambiguation)''
Infobox Constellation
name Aries
abbreviation Ari
genitive Arietis
symbology the Ram
RA 3
dec 20
areatotal 441
arearank 39th
numberstars 2
starname Ari (Hamal)
starmagnitude 2.0
meteorshowers
May Arietids
Autumn Arietids
Delta Arietids
Epsilon Arietids
Daytime Arietids
Aries Triangulids
bordering
Perseus
Triangulum
Pisces
Cetus
Taurus
latmax 90
latmin 60
month December
notes
'''Aries''' (Latin for ''Ram'', symbol , Unicode ) is one of the constellations of the zodiac. It lies between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east.
Notable features
Aries' stars are rather faint except for Ari (Hamal) and Ari (Sharatan). Other important stars are Ari (Mesarthim) and Ari (Botein).
Teegarden's star, in Aries, is one of our sun's closest neighbours.
Notable deep sky objects
The few deep sky objects in Aries are very dim. They include the galaxies NGC 697 (northwest of ), NGC 772 (southeast of ), NGC 972 (in the constellation's northern corner), and NGC 1156 (northwest of ).
Mythology
When including fainter stars, visible to the naked eye, the area resembles the head of a ram, having a general herbivore head shape and a spiral horn.
In Greek mythology, this is believed to represent the ram which carried Athamas's son Phrixus and daughter Helle to Colchis to escape their stepmother Ino. Helle fell off into the sea which later became the Hellespont. On reaching safety, Phrixis sacrificed the ram and hung its fleece in the Grove of Ares, where it turned to gold and later became the quest of Jason and the Argonauts. It appears that Babylonians, Greeks, Persians and Egyptians all agreed on the name of the Ram for this constellation.
The main area of the sky constituting the sign of Aries, containing part of Pisces, the Pleiades, and the constellation of Andromeda, may be the origin of the myth of the girdle of Hippolyte, which forms part of The Twelve Labours of Hercules.
Astrology
The Western astrological sign Aries of the tropical zodiac (March 21April 19) differs from the astronomical constellation and the Hindu astrological sign of the sidereal zodiac (April 19 May 13).
In some cosmologies, Aries is associated with the classical element Fire, and thus called a fire sign (along with Sagittarius and Leo). It is the domicile of Mars and the exaltation of the Sun. It is also one of the four Cardinal signs (along with Libra, Capricorn, and Cancer). Its polar opposite is Libra. Each astrological sign is assigned a part of the body, viewed as the seat of its power. Aries rules the head and face. The symbol for Aries is the ram.
Notable and named stars
style "color: 000000 font size:smaller " cellspacing 2 cellpadding 0
! style "background color: dddddd " BD
! style "background color: dddddd " F
! style "background color: dddddd " Names and other designations
! style "background color: dddddd " Mag.
! style "background color: dddddd " Ly away
! style "background color: dddddd " Comments
13 Alpha Arietis, Hamal, Hemal, Hamul, Ras Hammel, El Nath, Arietis 2.01 65.9
''ra's u al amal'' Head of the ram
''an na'' The butting (horn)
style "background color: eeeeee "
6 Beta Arietis, Sheratan, Sharatan, Al Sharatain 2.64 59.6
''a arn'' The (two) signs (originally and Ari)
c 41 41 Arietis, Bharani 3.61 159
style "background color: eeeeee "
sup, sup 5 Gamma Arietis, Mesarthim, Mesartim 3.88 204
triple star system component magnitudes: 4.75, 4.83, 9.6
is an Alpha2 Canum Venaticorum type variable star
56 Delta Arietis, Botein 4.35 168
''al buayn'' The belly diminutive
style "background color: eeeeee "
39 39 Arietis 4.52
48 Epsilon Arietis 4.63 293
triple star system component magnitudes: 5.2, 5.5, 12.7
style "background color: eeeeee "
35 35 Arietis 4.65
9 Lambda Arietis 4.79 133
binary star component magnitudes: 4.9, 7.4
style "background color: eeeeee "
58 Zeta Arietis 4.87 340
14 14 Arietis 4.98
style "background color: eeeeee "
12 Kappa Arietis 5.03 187
spectroscopic binary
8 Iota Arietis 5.09 660
spectroscopic binary
style "background color: eeeeee "
63 Tau 2 Arietis 5.10 319
38 38 Arietis 5.17
style "background color: eeeeee "
17 Eta Arietis 5.23 98.3
42 Pi Arietis 5.26 600
close spectroscopic binary
style "background color: eeeeee "
61 Tau 1 Arietis 5.27 462
eclipsing triple star system. Magnitude fluctuation: 5.265.32. Component magnitudes: 5.4, 7.9, 8.4
33 33 Arietis 5.30
style "background color: eeeeee "
32 Nu Arietis 5.45 347
52 52 Arietis 5.45
binary star component magnitudes: 6.8, 7.0
style "background color: eeeeee "
24 Xi Arietis 5.48 600
64 64 Arietis 5.50
style "background color: eeeeee "
43 Sigma Arietis 5.52 480
62 62 Arietis 5.55
style "background color: eeeeee "
21 21 Arietis 5.57
22 Theta Arietis 5.58 387
style "background color: eeeeee "
46 Rho 3 Arietis, Rho Arietis 5.58 115
10 10 Arietis 5.64
style "background color: eeeeee "
31 31 Arietis 5.64
15 15 Arietis 5.68
style "background color: eeeeee "
19 19 Arietis 5.72
34 Mu Arietis 5.74 338
style "background color: eeeeee "
55 55 Arietis 5.74
45 Rho 2 Arietis, RZ Arietis 5.76 404
semiregular variable
style "background color: eeeeee "
7 7 Arietis 5.76
37 Omicron Arietis 5.78 482
style "background color: eeeeee "
56 56 Arietis 5.78
20 20 Arietis 5.79
style "background color: eeeeee "
47 47 Arietis 5.80
1 1 Arietis 5.83
binary star component magnitudes 6.2, 7.3.
style "background color: eeeeee "
40 40 Arietis 5.83
4 4 Arietis 5.86
style "background color: eeeeee "
49 49 Arietis 5.91
59 59 Arietis 5.91
style "background color: eeeeee "
29 20 Arietis 6.00
11 11 Arietis 6.01
style "background color: eeeeee "
16 16 Arietis 6.01
30 30 Arietis 6.01
binary star component magnitudes: 6.51, 7.09
style "background color: eeeeee "
66 66 Arietis 6.03
65 65 Arietis 6.07
style "background color: eeeeee "
53 53 Arietis 6.13
26 26 Arietis 6.14
style "background color: eeeeee "
60 60 Arietis 6.14
27 27 Arietis 6.21
style "background color: eeeeee "
54 54 Arietis 6.24
36 36 Arietis 6.40
style "background color: eeeeee "
25 25 Arietis 6.45
3 3 Arietis 6.55
style "background color: eeeeee "
51 51 Arietis 6.62
44 Rho 1 Arietis 7.10
style "background color: eeeeee "
HD 12661 7.44 121
has two planets
BD 20307 9.01 300
style "background color: eeeeee "
TZ Arietis 12.1 14.5
flare star
Teegarden's star, SO025300.5 165258 15.4 12.6
nearby
high proper motion
Source: citeThe Bright Star Catalogue, 5th Revised Ed. cite, citeThe Hipparcos Catalogue, ESA SP 1200 cite
See also
External links
Category:Astrological signs
an:Aries
ast:Aries
ca: ries
cs:Beran (souhv zd )
da:V dderen (stjernetegn)
de:Widder (Sternbild)
es:Aries
eo: afo (Zodiako)
fr:B lier (constellation)
ga:An Reithe
ko:
id:Aries
it:Ariete (astronomia)
ka:
ku:Beran (bir )
la:Aries (sidus)
lt:Avinas (astronomija)
nl:Ram (sterrenbeeld)
ja:
pl:Baran (gwiazdozbi r)
pt:Aries
ru: ( )
sk:S hvezdie Baran
fi:Oinas
sv:V duren
th:
zh:
Infobox Constellation
name Aquarius
abbreviation Aqr
genitive Aquarii
symbology the Water bearer
RA 23
dec 15
areatotal 980
arearank 10th
numberstars 2
starname Aqr (Sadalsuud)
starmagnitude 2.9
meteorshowers
March Aquarids
Eta Aquarids (May4)
Delta Aquarids (June28)
Iota Aquarids
bordering
Pisces
Pegasus
Equuleus
Delphinus
Aquila
Capricornus
Piscis Austrinus
Sculptor
Cetus
latmax 65
latmin 90
month October
notes
'''Aquarius''' (Latin for the ''Water bearer'' or ''Cup bearer'', symbol , Unicode ) is the eleventh sign of the zodiac, situated between Capricornus and Pisces. Its symbol is , representing part of a stream of water.
Aquarius is one of the oldest recognized constellations along the zodiac, the sun's apparent path. It is found in a region often called the Sea due to its profusion of watery constellations such as Cetus, Pisces, Eridanus, etc. Sometimes, the river Eridanus is depicted spilling from Aquarius' watering pot.
Notable deep sky objects
There are three deep sky objects that are on the Messier catalog, the Globular Cluster M2, Globular Cluster M72, and the Open Cluster M73.
Two planetary nebulae are found in Aquarius: NGC 7009, called the Saturn Nebula due to its resemblance to the planet, to the southeast of Aquarii and NGC 7293, the famous Helix Nebula, southwest of Aquarii.
History
The constellation was immortalized in the 1960s, proclaimed the Age of Aquarius. However, there is no standard definition for astrological ages, so the age of Aquarius could begin in 2150 or even 2660, depending on the preferred definition. Based on the modern constellation boundaries of Pisces and Aquarius, the age of Aquarius would begin around 2660.
However, with so much of modern society reflecting the qualities of Aquarius most astrologers believe that this era has begun. Mass production, electricity, flight and space travel, electronic communications including computers the Internet, even the growing movement against capitalism in favour of a more socialist system of humanitarian development are all related to the Aquarian paradigm.
Mythology
The best known myth identifies Aquarius with Ganymede, a beautiful youth with whom Zeus fell in love, and whom he (in the guise of an eagle, represented as the constellation Aquila) carried off to Olympus to be cupbearer to the gods. Crater is sometimes identified as his cup.
Aquarius generally resembles the figure of a man, and when considering fainter humanly visible stars, it takes on the image of a man with a bucket from which is pouring a stream. Aquarius was also identified as the pourer of the waters which flooded the earth in the Great Flood, in the ancient Greek version of the myth. As such, the constellation Eridanus was sometimes identified as being a river poured out by Aquarius.
It may also, together with the constellation Pegasus, be part of the origin of the myth of the Mares of Diomedes, which forms one of The Twelve Labours of Heracles. Its association with pouring out rivers, and the nearby constellation of Capricornus, may be the source of the myth of the Augean stable, which forms another of the labours.
Astrology
The Western astrological sign Aquarius of the tropical zodiac (January 20 February 18) differs from the astronomical constellation and the Hindu astrological sign of the sidereal zodiac (February 16 March 11).
In some cosmologies, Aquarius is associated with the classical element Air, and thus called an Air Sign (with Libra and Gemini). It is also one of the four Fixed signs (along with Leo, Scorpio, and Taurus). Its polar opposite is Leo. It is the domicile of Saturn (since its discovery Uranus has been considered Aquarius' ruling or co ruling planet by many modern astrologers). Each astrological sign is assigned a part of the body, viewed as the seat of its power. Aquarius rules the circulatory system as well as the ankles. The symbol for Aquarius is the water bearer.
Notable and named stars
style "color: 000000 font size:smaller " cellspacing 2 cellpadding 0
! style "background color: dddddd " BD
! style "background color: dddddd " F
! style "background color: dddddd " Names and other designations
! style "background color: dddddd " Mag.
! style "background color: dddddd " Ly away
! style "background color: dddddd " Comments
22 Beta Aquarii, Sadalsuud, Sadalsud, Sad es Saud, Sadalsund, Saad el Sund 2.90 610
Luck of ''sasupcsupd as susupcsup d'' ''sasupcsupd as susupcsup d'' Luck of lucks
style "background color: eeeeee "
34 Alpha Aquarii, Sadalmelik, Sadal Melik, Sadalmelek, Sadlamulk, El Melik, Saad el Melik, Ruchbah 2.95 760
''sasupcsupd al malik mulk'' Luck of the king kinghood
'''Rucbah''' shared with Cassiopeiae
48 Gamma Aquarii, Sadachbia, Sadalachbia 3.86 158
''sasupcsupd u al axbiyah'' Luck of the tents (homes) ''lit.'' hidings shelters
style "background color: eeeeee "
76 Delta Aquarii, Skat, Scheat, Seat, Sheat 3.27 160
? '' i'at'' A wish ?
'''Seat''' shared with Aquarii
sup, sup 55 Zeta Aquarii 3.65 105
binary star component magnitudes 4.42, 4.59
style "background color: eeeeee "
c 88 88 Aquarii 3.68 234
73 Lambda Aquarii, Hydor, Ekkhysis 3.73 392
'' '' The water '' '' The outpouring
style "background color: eeeeee "
2 Epsilon Aquarii, Albali, Al Bali 3.78 230
''alb lisupcsup'' The swallower
b 98 98 Aquarii 3.96 162
style "background color: eeeeee "
62 Eta Aquarii 4.04 184
71 Tau 2 Aquarii 4.05 380
style "background color: eeeeee "
43 Theta Aquarii, Ancha 4.17 191
OHG ancha "the haunch"
90 Phi Aquarii 4.22 222
style "background color: eeeeee "
91 Psi 1 Aquarii 4.24 148
33 Iota Aquarii 4.29 173
style "background color: eeeeee "
b 99 99 Aquarii 4.38
93 Psi 2 Aquarii 4.41 322
Be star
style "background color: eeeeee "
k 3 3 Aquarii 4.43
c 86 86 Aquarii 4.48
style "background color: eeeeee "
105 Omega 2 Aquarii 4.49 154
13 Nu Aquarii, Albulaan 4.50 164
? ''al bulasupcsup n'' The (two) swallowers
'''Albulaan''' shared with Aquarii.
style "background color: eeeeee "
52 Pi Aquarii, Seat 4.66 1100
'''Seat''' shared with Aquarii
Gamma Cassiopeiae type variable star
23 Xi Aquarii 4.68 179
style "background color: eeeeee "
g 66 66 Aquarii 4.68
b 101 101 Aquarii 4.70
style "background color: eeeeee "
c 89 89 Aquarii 4.71
6 Mu Aquarii, Albulaan 4.73 155
? ''al bulasupcsup n'' The (two) swallowers
'''Albulaan''' shared with Aquarii.
style "background color: eeeeee "
31 Omicron Aquarii, Kae Uh 4.74 381
(Mandarin ''ga w '') The roof
Gamma Cassiopeiae type variable star
57 Sigma Aquarii 4.82 265
style "background color: eeeeee "
A 104 104 Aquarii 4.82
double star component magnitudes 4.82, 8.58
92 Chi Aquarii 4.93 640
style "background color: eeeeee "
102 Omega 1 Aquarii 4.97 134
95 Psi 3 Aquarii 4.99 249
style "background color: eeeeee "
63 Kappa Aquarii, Situla 5.04 234
"the water jar"
d 25 25 Aquarii 5.10
style "background color: eeeeee "
47 47 Aquarii 5.12
1 1 Aquarii 5.15
style "background color: eeeeee "
i 108 108 Aquarii 5.17
97 97 Aquarii 5.19
style "background color: eeeeee "
94 94 Aquarii 5.20
59 Upsilon Aquarii 5.21 74.2
style "background color: eeeeee "
i 106 106 Aquarii 5.24
68 68 Aquarii 5.24
style "background color: eeeeee "
i 107 107 Aquarii 5.28
32 32 Aquarii 5.29
style "background color: eeeeee "
41 41 Aquarii 5.33
42 42 Aquarii 5.34
style "background color: eeeeee "
46 Rho Aquarii 5.35 740
A 103 103 Aquarii 5.36
style "background color: eeeeee "
e 38 38 Aquarii 5.43
h 83 83 Aquarii 5.44
style "background color: eeeeee "
18 18 Aquarii 5.48
21 21 Aquarii 5.48
style "background color: eeeeee "
7 7 Aquarii 5.49
12 12 Aquarii 5.53
double star component magnitudes: 5.89, 7.31
style "background color: eeeeee "
49 49 Aquarii 5.53
77 77 Aquarii 5.53
style "background color: eeeeee "
5 5 Aquarii 5.55
f 53 53 Aquarii 5.55
double star component magnitudes: 6.35, 6.57
style "background color: eeeeee "
30 30 Aquarii 5.55
96 96 Aquarii 5.56
style "background color: eeeeee "
26 26 Aquarii 5.66
69 Tau 1 Aquarii 5.68 260
style "background color: eeeeee "
19 19 Aquarii 5.71
44 44 Aquarii 5.75
style "background color: eeeeee "
h h Aquarii 5.76
50 50 Aquarii 5.76
style "background color: eeeeee "
51 51 Aquarii 5.79
35 35 Aquarii 5.80
style "background color: eeeeee "
74 74 Aquarii 5.80
15 15 Aquarii 5.83
style "background color: eeeeee "
16 16 Aquarii 5.87
60 60 Aquarii 5.88
style "background color: eeeeee "
45 45 Aquarii 5.96
2 2 Aquarii 5.99
style "background color: eeeeee "
17 17 Aquarii 5.99
39 39 Aquarii 6.04
style "background color: eeeeee "
82 82 Aquarii 6.18
70 70 Aquarii 6.19
style "background color: eeeeee "
78 78 Aquarii 6.20
11 11 Aquarii 6.21
style "background color: eeeeee "
81 81 Aquarii 6.23
100 100 Aquarii 6.24
style "background color: eeeeee "
56 56 Aquarii 6.36
20 20 Aquarii 6.38
style "background color: eeeeee "
29 29 Aquarii 6.39
58 58 Aquarii 6.39
style "background color: eeeeee "
61 61 Aquarii 6.40
37 37 Aquarii 6.64
style "background color: eeeeee "
24 24 Aquarii 6.66
EZ Aquarii 12.66 11.26
flare star
nearby
Source: citeThe Bright Star Catalogue, 5th Revised Ed. cite, citeThe Hipparcos Catalogue, ESA SP 1200 cite
See also
References
External links
Aquarius constellation
Category:Astrological signs
ca:Aquari (constel laci )
cs:Vodn (souhv zd )
da:Vandmanden (stjernebillede)
de:Wassermann (Sternbild)
es:Aquarius
eo:Akvisto
fr:Verseau
ga:An tUiscead ir
ko:
id:Aquarius
it:Acquario (astronomia)
ka:
la:Aquarius (sidus)
lt:Vandenis
nl:Waterman
ja:
nn:Vassmannen
pl:Wodnik (gwiazdozbi r)
pt:Aquarius
ru: ( )
sk:S hvezdie Vodn r
fi:Vesimies
sv:Vattumannen
th:
zh:
'''Anime''' ( ) is a style of cartoon animation originating in Japan. Anime is characterized by character and background styles which may be created by hand or may be assisted by computers. Storylines may feature a variety of characters and may be set in different locations and in different eras. Anime is aimed at a broad range of audiences because there are a wide range of different genres that any series may be categorised under. Anime may be broadcast on television, distributed on media, such as DVDs, or published as console and computer games. Anime is often influenced by Japanese comics known as manga. Anime may also be adapted into live action television programs.
'' (1998)
TOC
br style "clear:both"
History
'' (also known as Astro Boy to Western audiences).
The '''history of anime''' begins at the start of the 20th century, when Japanese filmmakers experimented with the animation techniques that were being explored in the West. During the 1970s, anime developed further, separating itself from its Western roots, and developing unique genres such as mecha. In the 1980s, anime was accepted in the mainstream in Japan, and experienced a boom in production. The 1990s and 2000s saw an increased acceptance of anime in overseas markets.
Terminology
The Japanese term for animation is
(''anim shon'', pronounced: ), written in katakana. It is a direct transliteration and reborrowed loanword of the English term "animation." The Japanese term is abbreviated as (''anime'', pronounced: ). Both the original and abbreviated forms are valid and interchangeable in Japanese, but as could be expected the abbreviated form is more commonly used. The term is a broad one, and does not specify an animation's nation of origin or style.
'''Pronunciation'''
The English word ''anime'' is a transliteration of the abbreviated version of this Japanese term, and it is typically pronounced as , or "ANN ih may" ("AH nee may" is a less common variant).
Some theorize the word comes from the French ''anim '' ("animated") or "les dessins anim s" (animated drawings) and pronounce it as "ah nee MAY", though the Japanese themselves deny this theory, and the fact that it is written in Japanese syllables as (''anime'') rather than (''animei'') further lowers its credibility.
As with a few other Japanese words such as ''Pok mon'' and Kobo Ab , ''anime'' is sometimes spelled as ''anim '' in English with an acute accent over the final ''e'' to cue the reader that the letter is pronounced as . Hence, the pronunciations "ah NEEM" and "uh NEEM" are generally considered incorrect.
'''Syntax'''
''Anime'' can be used as a common noun, ''"Do you watch anime?"'' or as a suppletive adjective, ''"The anime Guyver is different from the movie Guyver."'' It may also be used as a mass noun, as in ''"How much anime have you collected?"'' and therefore is never pluralized "animes" (nouns are never pluralized in Japanese).
'''Synonyms'''
Anime is sometimes referred to by the blend word '''Japanimation''', but this term has fallen into disuse. It saw the most usage during the 1970s and 1980s, which broadly comprise the first and second waves of anime fandom. The term survived at least into the early 1990s but seemed to fade away shortly before the mid 1990s anime resurgence. In general, the term now only appears in nostalgic contexts. The term is much more commonly used within Japan to refer to domestic animation. Since ''anime'' or ''anim shon'' is used to describe all forms of animation, ''Japanimation'' is used to distinguish Japanese work from that of the rest of the world.
In more recent years, anime has also frequently been referred to as ''manga'' in Europe, a practice that may stem from the Japanese usage: In Japan, ''manga'' can refer to both animation and comics (although the use of ''manga'' to refer to animation is mostly restricted to non fans). Among English speakers, ''manga'' usually has the stricter meaning of "Japanese comics". An alternate explanation is that it is due to the prominence of Manga Entertainment, a distributor of anime to the US and UK markets because Manga Entertainment started out in the UK, this use of the term is much more common in Europe.
Characteristics
is one of the most popular sh nen anime.
Anime features a wide variety of artistic styles which vary from artist to artist and is characterized by stark, colorful graphics and stylized, colorful images depicting vibrant characters in a variety of different settings and storylines, aimed at a wide range of audiences.
Genres
Anime has many genres, with as many as traditional, live action cinema. Such genres include adventure, science fiction, children's stories, romance, medieval fantasy, erotica (hentai), occult horror, action, and drama.
Most anime includes content from several different genres, as well as a variety of thematic elements. This can make categorizing some titles very difficult. A show may have a seemingly simple surface plot, but at the same time may feature a far more complex, deeper storyline and character development. It is not uncommon for a strongly action themed anime to also involve humor, romance, and even poignant social commentary. The same can be applied to a romance themed anime in that it may involve a strong action element.
Genres and designations that are specific to anime and manga:
:''(For other possible genres, see list of movie genres.)''
Bish jo: Japanese for 'beautiful girl', blanket term that can be used to describe any anime that features pretty girl characters, for example ''Magic Knight Rayearth''
Bish nen: Japanese for 'beautiful boy' blanket term that can be used to describe any anime that features "pretty" and elegant boys and men, for example ''Fushigi Y gi''
Ecchi: Japanese for 'indecent sexuality'. Contains mild sexual humor, for example ''Love Hina''.
Hentai: Japanese for 'abnormal' or 'perverted', and used by Western Audiences to refer to pornographic anime or erotica. However, in Japan the term used to refer to the same material is typically ''Poruno'' or ''Ero''.
Josei: Japanese for 'young woman', this is anime or manga that is aimed at young women, and is one of the rarest forms.
Kodomo: Japanese for 'child', this is anime or manga that is aimed at young children, for example ''Doraemon''.
Mecha: Anime or manga featuring giant robots, example ''Mobile Suit Gundam''.
Mo : Anime or manga featuring characters that are extremely perky or cute, for example ''Little Snow Fairy Sugar''.
Progressive: "Art films" or extremely stylized anime, for example ''Voices of a Distant Star''.
Seinen: Anime or manga similar to Sh nen, but targeted at teenage or young male adults, for example ''Oh My Goddess!''.
Sentai Super Sentai: Literally "fighting team" in Japanese, refers to any show that involves a superhero team, for example ''Cyborg 009''.
Sh jo: Japanese for 'young lady' or 'little girl', refers to anime or manga targeted at girls, for example ''Fruits Basket''.
Mah Sh jo: Subgenre of Shoujo known for 'Magical Girl' stories, for example ''Sailor Moon''.
Sh jo ai: Japanese for 'girl love', refers to anime or manga that focus on love and romance between female characters, for example ''Revolutionary Girl Utena''.
Sh nen: Japanese for 'boys', refers to anime or manga targeted at boys, for example ''Dragon Ball Z''.
Sh nen ai: Japanese for 'boy love', refers to anime or manga that focus on love and romance between male characters. This term is being phased out in Japan due to references to pedophilia, and is being replaced by the term "Boys Love" (BL). An example of this style is ''Gravitation''.
Some anime titles are written for a very specific audience, even narrower than those described above. For example, ''Initial D'' and '' X Driver'' concern street racing and car tuning. ''Ashita No Joe'' is about boxing. ''Hanaukyo Maid Team'' is based on the French maid fantasy.
Recently, the ''National Child Exploitation Coordination Centre of Canada'' has incorrectly classified all anime as hentai, giving an improper impression of the content of most anime and manga series. This occurred despite having linked to this Wikipedia page in order to establish a definition of terms. The site can be viewed at the following link: . Complaints about the article's content and improper citations caused the NCECC to revise the citations but not the content.
Music
Much like western live action cinema, anime uses music as an important artistic tool. Anime soundtracks are big business in Japan, and are often times met with similar demand as chart topping pop albums. It is for this reason that anime music is often composed and performed by 'A list' musicians, stars, and composers. Skilled BGM composers are highly respected in the anime fan community. Anime series with opening credits use the opening theme song as a quick introduction to the show.
The most frequent use of music in Anime is ''background music'' or ''BGM''. BGM is used to set the tone of a given scene, for example ''Neon Genesis Evangelion'' 's "Decisive Battle" is played when the characters are making battle preparations and it features heavy drum beats and a militaristic style which highlights the tension of the scene and hints at the action to follow.
The theme song (also referred to as the Opening song or abbreviated as OP) usually matches the overall tone of the show, and serves to get the viewer excited about the upcoming program. Insert songs and ending songs (abbr. ED) often make commentary about the plot or the program as a whole, and are often times used to highlight a particularly important scene. Opening and ending themes, as well as insert songs, are frequently performed by popular musicians or Japanese idols, so in this way, songs become a very important component of an anime program. In addition to the themes, the seiy for a specific anime also frequently releases CD for their character, called Image Albums. Despite the word "image" in the CD's name, it only contains music and or "voice messages" (where the seiy talks with the audience or about herself), making the listener think that the character him herself is singing. Another type of Anime CDs release are Drama CD, featuring songs and tracks which makes use of the seiy to tell a story, often not included in the main anime.
Animation style
'', an iconic anime character.
The drawing style used in anime is counter productive to the animation process, having far too many details and subsequently making it difficult to keep the number of drawings comparable to other cartoons with design ethics that stress simplicity. This may be due to a philosophy of applying more effort into each of a few drawings than less effort into one of many.
Osamu Tezuka adapted and simplified many Disney animation precepts to reduce the budget costs and number of frames in the production, though it should be noted that Disney films made in the west are not anime. This was intended to be a temporary measure to allow him to produce one episode every week with an inexperienced animation staff. Anime studios have since perfected techniques to draw as little new animation as possible, using scrolling or repeating backgrounds, still shots of characters sliding across the screen, and dialogue which involves only animating mouths while the rest of the screen remains absolutely still, a technique not wholly unfamiliar to Western animation. The overall effect of these techniques, such as reduced frame rate, several still shots and scrolling backgrounds, has led some critics to accuse anime of choppiness or poor quality in general. ''(See also limited animation.)''
There are often scenes where the frame rate of the animation far exceeds the quality of the rest of the production. These are commonly referred to as "money shots" outside of Japan, where more effort is put into the animation of one scene to give it emphasis over the rest of the work. Animator Yasuo Otsuka was the pioneer of this technique.
Exceptions to these rules are early classic films, such as those produced by Toei Animation up until the mid 1960s, and recent big budget films, such as those produced by the enormously successful Studio Ghibli. These movies have much higher production values, due to their anticipated success at the box office. Some animators in Japan overcome production values by utilizing different techniques than the Disney or the old Tezuka Otsuka methods of animating anime. Directors such as Hiroyuki Imaishi (''Cutey Honey'', ''Dead Leaves'') simplify backgrounds so that more attention can be paid to character animation. Other animators like Tatsuyuki Tanaka (in Koji Minamoto's ''Eternal Family'' in particular) use squash and stretch, an animation technique not often used by Japanese animators Tanaka makes other shortcuts to compensate for this. Some higher budgeted television and OVA (Original Video Animation) series also forego the shortcuts found in most other anime.
While different titles and different artists have their own unique artistic styles, many stylistic elements have become extremely common. Some examples have become so common that they are often described as being definitive of anime in general, and have been given names of their own. The most common is the large eyes style drawn on many anime characters, common mainly due to the influence of Osamu Tezuka, who was inspired by the exaggerated features of Western cartoon characters such as Betty Boop and Mickey Mouse and from Disney's ''Bambi''. Tezuka found that large eyes allowed his characters to better express their emotions. Some Western audiences have interpreted such stylized eyes as more Caucasian. Cultural anthropologist Matt Thorn argues that Japanese animators and audiences do not perceive them as inherently more or less foreign. When Tezuka began drawing ''Ribbon no Kishi'', the first manga specifically targeted at young girls, Tezuka further exaggerated the size of the characters' eyes. Indeed, through ''Ribbon no Kishi'', Tezuka set a stylistic template that later ''sh jo'' artists tended to follow. Another variation of this style is "chibi" or "super deformed" which usually feature huge eyes, an enlarged head, and small body.
Other stylistic elements are common as well often in comedic anime, characters that are shocked or surprised will perform a "face fault", in which they display an extremely exaggerated expression. Angry characters may exhibit a "vein" or "stressmark" effect, where lines representing bulging veins will appear on their forehead. Angry women will sometimes summon a mallet from nowhere and strike someone with it, leading to the concept of Hammerspace. Male characters will develop a bloody nose around their female love interests (typically to indicate arousal) this is supposedly due to blood rushing to the face in an exaggerated blush. Embarrassed characters will invariably produce a massive sweat drop, which has become something of a stereotype of anime.
The degree of stylization varies from title to title. Some titles make extensive use of common stylization: ''FLCL'', for example, is known for its wild, exaggerated, stylization. In contrast, titles such as ''Only Yesterday'', a film by Isao Takahata, take a much more realistic approach, and feature no stylistic exaggerations.
Another unique aspect of anime not found in other commercial animation markets is the lack of a directoral system. In most animation produced around the world animators are all forced to conform to a set style by the director or animation director. In Japan starting with the animation director Yoshinori Kanada (as a means to save time and money) each animator brings his her own style to the work. The most extreme examples of this can be found in ''Mindgame'' or ''The Hakkenden''. ''The Hakkenden'' is particularly extreme, showing constantly shifting styles of animation based upon the key animator that worked on that particular episode. This approach combined with Otsuka's "money shots" make key animators important individuals in the style and production of an anime film.
Many non Japanese cartoons are starting to incorporate mainstream anime shortcuts and symbols to appeal to anime's tremendously growing fanbase and cut costs.
Production types of anime
Most anime can be categorized as one of three types:
'''Films''', which are generally released in theaters, represent the highest budgets and generally the highest video quality. Popular anime movies include ''Akira,'' ''Ghost in the Shell'', and ''Spirited Away''. Some anime films are only released at film or animation festivals and are shorter and sometimes lower in production values. Some examples of these are ''Winter Days'', and Osamu Tezuka's ''Legend of the Forest''. Other types of films include compilation movies, which are television episodes edited together and presented in theaters for various reasons, and are hence a concentrated form of a television serial. These may, however, be longer than the average movie. There are also theatrical shorts derived from existing televisions series and billed in Japanese theaters together to form feature length showing.
'''Television series''' anime is syndicated and broadcast on television on a regular schedule. Television series are generally low quality compared to OVA (Original Video Animation) and film titles, because the production budget is spread out over many episodes rather than a single film or a short series. Most episodes are about 23 minutes in length, to fill a typical thirty minute time slot with added commercials. One full season is 26 episodes, and many titles run half seasons, or 13 episodes. Most TV series anime episodes will have opening credits, closing credits, and often an "eyecatch", a very short scene, often humorous or silly, that is used to signal the start or end of the commercial break (as "bumpers" in the United States are used in a similar fashion). "Eyecatch" scenes are often found in TV series anime and are generally similar throughout the series.
'''OVA''' ('''Original Video Animation''' sometimes '''OAV''', or '''Original Animated Video''') anime is often similar to a television miniseries. OVAs are typically two to twenty episodes in length one shots are particularly short, usually less than film length. They are most commonly released directly to video. As a general rule OVA anime tends to be of high quality, approaching that of films. Titles often have a very regular, continuous plot best enjoyed if all episodes are viewed in sequence. Popular OVA titles include ''FLCL'', ''Bubblegum Crisis'', and ''Tenchi Muyo!''. Opening credits, closing credits, and eyecatches may sometimes be found in OVA releases, but not universally.
'''Franchising'''
It is very common for one title to spawn several different releases. A title that starts as a popular television series might then have a movie produced at a later date. A good example is ''Tenchi Muyo!''. Originally an OVA, it spawned three movies, three television series, and several spinoff titles and specials.
Not all successors to an anime are a sequel to the original story. Prequels and alternate stories are commonly adapted from the original.
Licensing and distribution
Anime is available outside of Japan in localized form. Licensed anime is modified by Western distributors through dubbing into the language of the country. The anime may also be edited to alter cultural references that may not be understood by a non Japanese person and companies may remove what may be perceived as objectionable content. For the fans who may object to the editing and dubbing of anime, DVDs may be their preference. DVD releases often include both the dubbed audio and the original Japanese audio with subtitles, are typically unedited, and lack commercials.
'''Fansubs'''
Although it is a violation of copyright laws in many countries, some fans watch fansubs, recordings of anime series that have been subtitled by fans. Watching subtitled Japanese versions is usually seen as the intended method of watching anime by enthusiasts. The ethical implications of producing, distributing, or watching fansubs is a topic of much controversy even when fansub groups do not profit from and cease distribution of their work once the series has been licensed.
:''See fansub for further discussion of ethical issues of fansubbing''
See also
from the animation ''Laputa'' on top of the Ghibli Museum in Mitaka, Tokyo.
Animated cartoon
Animation
Anime industry
Anime physics
History of Anime
Manga
Traditional animation
Amerime
Editing of anime in international distribution
'''Terminology'''
Anime Music Video
Catgirl
Chibi
Cosplay
D jinshi or Doujinshi
Dorama
Eroge
Ganguro
Guro
Hentai
J pop
Lolicon
Otaku
Seiy
Shota
'''Licensing and translation'''
Editing of anime in international distribution
Fansub
Glossary:Japanese film credit terms
'''Lists'''
Animated television series
Anime Characters
Anime Companies
Conventions
List of anime
Notable anime
Anime theatrically released in America
Notable names in anime (directors, creators, and so forth)
References
Clements, Jonathan and Helen McCarthy. ''The Anime Encyclopedia''. Berkeley, Calif.: Stone Bridge Press, 2001. ISBN 1880656647.
Napier, Susan J. ''Anime: From Akira to Princess Mononoke''. New York: Palgrave, 2001. ISBN 031223862.
Poitras, Gilles. ''Anime Companion''. Berkeley, Calif.: Stone Bridge Press, 1998. ISBN 1880656329.
Poitras, Gilles. ''Anime Essentials''. Berkeley, Calif.: Stone Bridge Press, 2000. ISBN 1880656531.
Baricordi, Andrea and Pelletier, Claude. ''Anime: A Guide to Japanese Animation (1958 1988)''. Montreal, Canada.: Protoculture, 2000. ISBN 2980575909.
External links
'''Databases'''
: database of anime series, hashes, fansub groups, and 'mylist' feature.
: Anime database, community forum and articles on culture, style, and prominent figures.
: Anime database, reviews, and community forums.
: Comprehensive anime title database.
'''Link sites'''
Directory of anime sites and resources.
'''News'''
: Anime news site, also has weekly columns, forums, and an extensive encyclopedia of series, companies, and staff cast.
'''Wikis'''
Their goal is to build a wiki without copying other sources.
'''Review sites'''
: Extensive database of anime DVD reviews.
An archive of anime, video games, manga, and related soundrack reviews.
Reviews of current and past anime series.
Indepth reviews and synopses of various anime titles.
Reviews of anime and manga, as well as other various resources.
'''Other reference'''
: Webzine and an archive of anime music, ost, j music.
: Common cliches and visual cues.
Notes
! Please do NOT change the Esperanto link again. This one is correct, and 'Animeo' is not. Thank you.
Category:Animation
Category:Art genres
Category:Cartooning
Category:Film
ar:
ca:Anime
cs:Anime
da:Anime
de:Anime
el:Anime
es:Anime
eo:japana desegnita filmo
fr:Anime
gl:Anime
ko:
id:Anime
is:Anime
it:Anime
he: ( )
lt:Anime
hu:Anime
ms:Anime
nl:Anime
ja:
no:Anime
pl:Anime
pt:Anime
ru:
sq:Anime
sk:Anime
sl:Anime
fi:Anime
sv:Anime
tl:Anime
th:
tr:Anime
vi:Anime
zh:
'''Asterism''' may refer to:
Asterism (astronomy)
Asterism (gemmology)
Asterism (typography)
fr:Ast risme
it:Asterismo
Infobox town TR
name Ankara
map2 Ankara City Center.jpg
map2 size 250
map2 cap Ankara from the Atakule Tower, looking N NE
map Ankara Turkey Provinces locator.gif
map size 250
map cap Location in Turkey
province Ankara
population 4,319,167
population as of 2005
population ref
pop dens
area
lat deg 39
lat min 52
lat hem N
lon deg 32
lon min 52
lon hem E
elevation 850
postal code 06x xx
area code 0312
licence 06
mayor . Melih G k ek (Justice and Development Party)
website
'''Ankara''' is the capital of Turkey and the country's second largest city after stanbul. The city has a population of 4,319,167 (Provience 5,153,000) (as of 2005), and a mean elevation of 850 m. (2800 ft.) It was formerly known as '''Angora''' or '''Eng r ''', and in Roman times as '''Ancyra''', and in classical and Hellenistic periods as ''' kyra'''.
It is also the capital of Ankara Province.
Centrally located in Anatolia, Ankara is an important commercial and industrial city. It is the center of the Turkish Government, and houses all foreign embassies. It is an important crossroads of trade, strategically located at the center of Turkey's highway and rail network, and serves as the marketing center for the surrounding agricultural area. The city was famous for its long haired goat and its wool (Angora wool), a unique breed of cat (Ankara cat), white rabbits, pear, honey, and the region's muscat grapes.
Ankara is situated upon a steep and rocky hill, which rises 500 ft. above the plain on the left bank of the ''Enguri Su'', a tributary of the Sakarya (Sangarius) river. The city is located 3952'30" North, 3252' East (39.875, 32.8333). The city, which is one of the driest places in Turkey and surrounded by a barren featureless steppe vegetation, with various Hittite, Phrygian, Ottoman, Byzantine and Roman archeological sites. It has a harsh dry continental climate with cold snowy winters and hot dry summers. Rainfall occurs mostly during spring and autumn.
The hill is crowned by the ruins of the old castle, which add to the picturesqueness of the view but the town was not well built, many of its houses constructed of sun dried mud bricks along narrow streets. sup sup
History
.
The region's vibrant history can be traced back to the Bronze Age Hatti civilization, which was succeeded in the 2nd millennium BC by the Hittites, in the 10th century BC by the Phrygians, then by the Lydians and Persians.
Persian sovereignty lasted until the Persians' defeat at the hands of the Macedonian king Alexander the Great. In 333 BC, Alexander came from Gordium to Ankara and stayed in the city for a period of time. After his death at Babylon in 323 BC and the subsequent division of his empire amongst his generals, Ankara and its environs fell into the share of Antigonus.
In 278 BC, Ankara was occupied by the Gaulish race of Galatians who were the first to make Ankara their capital. It was then known as '''Ancyra''', meaning "anchor" in Greek. Ankara's organized and written history starts with the Galatians.
The city subsequently fell to the Roman Empire in 189 BC and became the capital of the Roman province of Galatia. Under Roman rule, Ankara became a gate to the east for Rome, and as such was well developed, achieving the status of "city state" or polis. The city's military as well as logistical significance lasted well into the long Byzantine reign, even after its capital was moved to Constantinople. Although Ankara fell into the hands of several Arab armies numerous times after the 6th century, it remained an important crossroads polis within the Byzantine Empire until the late 11th century.
In 1071 Seljuk Sultan Alparslan threw open the door to Anatolia for the Turks by his victory at Malazgirt. He then annexed Ankara, an important location for military transportation and natural resources, to Turkish territory in 1073. Orhan I, second "bey" of the Ottoman Empire captured the city in 1356. Another Turkic leader, Timur Lenk besieged Ankara as part of his campaign in Anatolia, but in 1403 Ankara was again under Ottoman control.
At the close of World War I, Turkey was under the control of the Ottoman sultan and having lost the war, was being shared by Greeks, French, British, and Italians. The leader of the Turkish nationalists, Kemal Atat rk established the headquarters of his resistance movement in Ankara in 1919 (See Treaty of S vres and Turkish War of Independence). After the War of Independence was won and the Ottoman Empire was dissolved, Turkey was declared a republic on October 29, 1923, Ankara having replaced stanbul (formerly Constantinople) as the capital of the new Republic of Turkey on October 13, 1923.
After Ankara became the capital of the newly founded Republic of Turkey, new development divided the city into an old section, called '''Ulus''', and a new section, called '''Yeni ehir'''. Ancient buildings reflecting Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman history and narrow winding streets mark the old section. The new section, now centered around '''K z lay''', has the trappings of a more modern city: wide streets, hotels, theaters, shopping malls, and high rises. Government offices and foreign embassies are also located in the new section.
Attractions
General attractions
An tkabir is located on an imposing hill in the ''Anittepe'' quarter of the city stands the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atat rk, founder of the Republic of Turkey. Completed in 1953, it is an impressive fusion of ancient and modern architecture. An adjacent museum houses a superior wax statue of Atat rk, his writings, letters and personal items, as well as an exhibition of photographs recording important moments in his life and in the establishment of the Republic (Anitkabir is open everyday, and the adjacent museum every day except Mondays).
'''The Ankara Ethnography Museum (''Etno rafya M zesi'')''': This museum is opposite the Opera House on Talat Pasa Boulevard, in Ulus district. There is a fine collection of folkloric as well as Seljuk and Ottoman era artifacts.
'''The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (''Anadolu Medeniyetleri M zesi'')''': Situated at the Ankara Castle entrance, it is an old "bedesten" (covered bazaar) that has been beautifully restored and now houses a unique collection of Paleolithic, Neolithic, Hatti, Hittite, Phrygian, Urartian, and Roman works and showpiece Lydian treasures.
'''The engelhan Rahmi M. Ko Museum ('' engelhan Rahmi M. Ko M zesi'')''': is an industrial museum opposite the entrance to the Citadel, close to Anatolian Civilization Museum. Located in the historic engelhan a former Caravanserai, built in 1522 the Museum displays huge variety of exhibits on such diverse themes as Engineering, Road Transport, Scientific Instruments, Maritime, Medicine, and many others. The beautiful and atmospheric courtyard now houses the newly restored shop where the founder of the Ko Group, Mr Vehbi Ko started his working life. And when you have finished your museum visit, you can relax in either the Divan Caf or the sophisticated Divan Brasserie in the courtyard.
'''State Art and Sculpture Museum (The Painting and Sculpture Museum) (''Resim Heykel M zesi'')''': Close to the Ethnography Museum and houses a rich collection of Turkish art from the late 19th century to the present day. There are also galleries which host guest exhibitions.
'''The War of Independence Museum (''Kurtulu Sava M zesi'')''': In Ulus Square, is what was originally the first parliament building of the Republic of Turkey. There the War of Independence was planned and directed here as recorded in various photographs and items presently on exhibition. In another display, wax figures of former presidents of the Republic of Turkey are on exhibit.
'''The TCDD Locomotive Museum''': Near the railway station by Celal Bayar Blvd., is a very interesting open air museum that traces the history of steam locomotion through the locomotives and artifacts on display.
Archeological sites
'''Ankara Citadel''': The foundations of the citadel were laid by the Galatians on a prominent lava outcrop, and the rest was completed by the Romans. The Byzantines and Seljuks further made restorations and additions. The area around and inside the citadel, being the oldest part of Ankara, contains many fine examples of traditional architecture. There are also recreational areas to relax. Many restored traditional Turkish houses inside the citadel area have found new life as restaurants, serving local cuisine, music and of course, Raki.
'''Roman Theatre''': The remains, the stage, and the backstage, can be seen outside the castle. Roman statues that were found here are exhibited in the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (see above). The seating area is still under excavation.
'''Temple of Augustus''': It was built by the Galatian King Pylamenes in AD 10 as a tribute and sign of fidelity to Augustus, and was reconstructed by the Romans on the ancient Ankara Acropolis in the 2nd century. It is important for the "Monument Ancyranum", the sole surviving political testament of Augustus, detailing his achievements inscribed on its walls in Latin and Greek. In the fifth century the temple was converted into a church by the Byzantines. The temple is in the Ulus quarter of the city.
'''Roman Bath''': This bath has all the typical features of a classical Roman bath: a frigidarium (cold room), tepidarium (cool room) and caldarium (hot room). The bath was built in the reign of Emperor Caracalla in 3rd century AD to honour the Asclepios, the God of Medicine. Today only the basement and first floors remain. Situated in Ulus quarter.
'''Column of Julian''': This column, in Ulus, was erected in AD 362, to commemorate a visit by the Roman Emperor Julian the Apostate. It stands fifteen meters high and has a typical leaf decoration on the capital.
Modern monuments
'''Monument to a Secure, Confident Future''': This monument, in G ven Park, Bakanl klar quarter, was erected in 1935 and bears Atat rk's advice to his people: "Turk! Be proud, work hard, and believe in yourself."
'''Victory Monument (''Zafer An t '')''': Erected in 1927 in Zafer Square in the S hhiye quarter, it depicts Atat rk in uniform.
'''Hatti Monument''': Built in the 1970's in S hhiye Square, this impressive monument symbolizes the Hatti gods and commemorates Anatolia's earliest known civilization.
Mosques
'''Kocatepe Mosque''': This mosque was constructed in the late 20th century in accordance with classical Ottoman models, which emphasize the placement of four minarets. Its size and prominent location make it a landmark that can be seen from most anywhere in central Ankara.
'''Haci Bayram Mosque''': This mosque, in Ulus quarter next to the Temple of Augustus, was built in the early 15th century in Seljuk style and was subsequently restored by architect Sinan in the 16th century, with Kutahya tiles being added in the 18th century. The mosque was built in honor of Haci Bayram Veli, whose tomb is next to the mosque.
Parks
Ankara has many delightful parks and open spaces mainly established in the early years of the Republic and well maintained and expanded thereafter. The most important of these parks are: Gen lik Park (houses an amusement park with a large pond for rowing), the Botanical Garden, Se menler Park, Anayasa Park, Ku ulu Park (famous for the swans received as a gift from the Chinese government), Abdi Ipekci Park, G ven Park (see above for the monument), Kurtulu Park (has an ice skating rink), Alt n Park (also a prominent exposition fair area), Harikalar Diyari (said to be, Europe's Biggest Park inside city borders) and G ksu Park.
'''Atat rk Farm and Zoo (''Atat rk Orman iftli i, AO '')''' is an expansive recreational farming area housing a zoo, several small agricultural farms, greenhouses, restaurants, a dairy farm and a brewery. It is a pleasant place to spend a day with family, be it for having picnics, hiking, biking or simply enjoying good food and nature. There is also an exact replica of the house where Atat rk was born in 1881, in Thessaloniki, Greece. Visitors to the " iftlik" (farm) as it is affectionately called by Ankarans, can sample such famous products of the farm as its excellent old fashioned beer and ice cream, fresh dairy products and meat rolls kebaps made on charcoal, through an excellent traditional restaurant (''Merkez Lokantasi'', Central Restaurant), caf s and other establishments scattered in the farm.
Shopping
Foreign visitors to Ankara usually like to visit the old shops in '' kr k lar Yoku u'' (Weavers' road) near Ulus, where a myriad of things ranging from traditional fabrics, hand woven carpets and leather products can be found for bargain prices. ''Bak rc lar ar s '' (Bazaar of coppersmiths) is particularly popular, and many interesting items, not just of copper, can be found here...like jewelry, carpets, costumes, antiques and embroidery. Walking up the hill to the castle gate, you find many shops selling a huge and fresh collection of spices, dried fruits, nuts, and other produce.
Modern shopping areas are mostly found in K z lay, or on Tunal Hilmi Avenue, including the modern mall of Karum which is located to the end of the Avenue and in the Atakule Tower in ankaya. ankaya being the quarter with the highest elevation in the city, the tower has a magnificent view over the whole city, and also has a revolving restaurant at the top where the complete panorama can be enjoyed in a more leisurely fashion.
As Ankara started expanding westward in the 1970s, there are several modern, suburbia style developments and mini cities along the western highway, also known as Eskisehir road. The Armada mall on the highway, the Galleria in mitk y, and a huge mall in Bilkent Center offering North American and European style mall shopping opportunities (These can be reached following the Eski ehir highway).
Universities
Ankara is known for the multitude of universities it is home to.
These include the following, several of them being among the most
reputable of the country:
Ankara University
At l m University
Ba kent University
Bilkent University
ankaya University
Gazi University
Hacettepe University
Middle East Technical University
Ufuk University
Transportation
Esenboga International Airport, located in the north of the city, is the main airport of Ankara. The bus lines constitute the main means of inter city transportation in Turkey, and (Turkish: Ankara ehirleraras Terminal letmesi, A T ) is an important part of the network. The railstation "Ankara Gar " of Turkish Republic Railways (Turkish: T rkiye Cumhuriyeti Devlet Demiryollar , TCDD) is an important hub connecting western and eastern parts of the country.
(Elektrik Gaz Otob s) operates the public transportation. There are currently two subway lines in the city and three more are under construction.
Sports
The city has three football clubs currently competing in the Turkish Premier Super League: Gen lerbirli i (finished 5th in the league), B y k ehir Belediye Ankaraspor (finished 7th in the league), and Ankarag c (finished 13th in the league).
See also
Synod of Ancyra
maNga (band)
External links
Category:Archaeological sites in Turkey
Category:Capitals in Asia
Category:Cities in Turkey
Category:Ankara
ar:
az:Ankara
bg:
bs:Ankara
ca:Ancyra
cs:Ankara
cy:Ankara
da:Ankara
de:Ankara
es:Ankara
eo:Ankara
fa:
fr:Ankara
gl:Ancara Ankara
ko:
hr:Ankara
io:Ankara
id:Ankara
ia:Ankara
it:Ankara
he:
ku:Enqere
la:Ancyra
lt:Ankara
lb:Ankara
hu:Ankara
nl:Ankara
nds:Ankara
ja:
ka:
no:Ankara
nn:Ankara
pl:Ankara
pt:Ancara
ro:Ankara
ru:
simple:Ankara
sk:Ankara
sl:Ankara
sr:
fi:Ankara
sv:Ankara
tr:Ankara ( ehir)
uk:
zh:
Infobox Language
name Arabic
nativename ''''
pronunciation al a.ra bij.ja
states Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Palestine (West Bank and Gaza), Western Sahara (SADR), Yemen by a majority, and in many other countries, such as Israel, as a minority language.
region Arab world
speakers 206 million (Ethnologue, native speakers of all dialects 1998 est.) 286 million (population of Arab countries, CIA World Factbook 2004 est.), excluding Arab minorities in other countries and bilingual speakers
rank 5 (by first language) slightly before Portuguese and Bengali
familycolor Afro Asiatic
fam2 Semitic
fam3 West Semitic
fam4 Central Semitic
script Arabic alphabet
nation Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Chad, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Western Sahara (SADR), Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
brA national language of: Mali, Senegal (Hassaniya).brbr
International organizations: United Nations, Arab League, Organization of Islamic Conference, African Union
agency Egypt: Academy of the Arabic Language
iso1 ar iso2 ara
lc1 ara ld1 Arabic (generic)br''see varieties of Arabic for the individual codes'' ll1 none
'''Arabic''' ( '''', less formally, '''') is the largest member of the Semitic branch of the Afro Asiatic language family (classification: South Central Semitic) and is closely related to Hebrew and Aramaic. It is spoken throughout the Arab world and is widely studied and known throughout the Islamic world. Arabic has been a literary language since at least the 6th century and is the liturgical language of Islam.
Quite a few English words are ultimately derived from Arabic, often through other European languages, especially Spanish, among them every day vocabulary like "sugar" (''sukkar''), "cotton" ('''') or "magazine" (''''). More recognizable are words like "algebra", "alcohol" and "zenith" (see list of English words of Arabic origin).
Literary and Modern Standard Arabic
The term "Arabic" may refer either to literary Arabic or Modern Standard Arabic or to the many localized varieties of Arabic commonly called "colloquial Arabic." Arabs consider literary Arabic as the standard language and tend to view everything else as mere dialects. Literary Arabic, '''' (Literally: "the most eloquent Arabic language" ) refers both to the language of present day media across North Africa and the Middle East and to the more articulate language of the Qur'an. (The expression ''media'' here includes most television and radio, and all written matter, including all books, newspapers, magazines, documents of every kind, and reading primers for small children.) "Colloquial" or "dialectal" Arabic refers to the many national or regional varieties derived from Classical Arabic, spoken daily across North Africa and the Middle East, which constitute the everyday spoken language. These sometimes differ enough to be mutually incomprehensible. These dialects are not typically written, although a certain amount of literature (particularly plays and poetry) exists in many of them. They are often used to varying degrees in informal spoken media, such as soap operas and talk shows.
Literary Arabic or classical Arabic is the official language of all Arab countries and is the only form of Arabic taught in schools at all stages.
The sociolinguistic situation of Arabic in modern times provides a prime example of the linguistic phenomenon of diglossia the normal use of two separate varieties of the same language, usually in different social situations. In the case of Arabic, educated Arabs of any nationality can be assumed to speak both their local dialect and their school taught literary Arabic (to an equal or lesser degree). This diglossic situation facilitates code switching in which a speaker switches back and forth unaware between the two varieties of the language, sometimes even within the same sentence. In instances in which Arabs of different nationalities engage in conversation only to find their dialects mutually unintelligible (e.g. a Moroccan speaking with a Lebanese), both should be able to code switch into Literary Arabic for the sake of communication.
Since the written Arabic of today differs from the written Arabic of the Qur'anic era, it has become customary in western scholarship and among non Arab scholars of Arabic to refer to the language of the Qur'an as Classical Arabic and the modern language of the media and of formal speech as Modern Standard Arabic. Arabs, on the other hand, often use the term '''' to refer to both forms, thus placing greater emphasis on the similarities between the two. The difference between Arabic of the Qur'anic era and today's Classical Arabic is only in the degree of eloquence. The vocabulary, the syntactic and grammatical rules are the same.
Arabic and Islam
It is sometimes difficult to translate Islamic concepts, and concepts specific to Arab culture, without using the original Arabic terminology. The Qur'an is expressed in Arabic and traditionally Muslims deem it impossible to translate in a way that would adequately reflect its exact meaningindeed, until recently, some schools of thought maintained that it should not be translated at all. A list of Islamic terms in Arabic covers those terms which are too specific to translate in one phrase. While Arabic is strongly associated with Islam (and is the language of salah), it is also spoken by Arab Christians, Oriental Jews, and smaller sects such as Iraqi Mandaeans. Even so, a majority of the world's Muslims do not actually speak Arabic, but only know some fixed phrases of the language, such as those used in Islamic prayer. However, to counteract this trend, non Arabic speaking Muslims are strongly encouraged to learn the language.
Classification and related languages
Maltese, which is spoken on the Mediterranean island of Malta, is the only surviving European language to derive primarily from Arabic, though it contains a large number of Italian and English borrowings.
Dialects
''See varieties of Arabic for main article''
"Colloquial Arabic" is a collective term for the spoken languages or dialects of people throughout the Arab world, which, as mentioned, differ radically from the literary language. The main dialectal division is between the Maghreb dialects and those of the Middle East, followed by that between sedentary dialects and the much more conservative Bedouin dialects. Maltese, though descended from Arabic, is considered a separate language. Speakers of some of these dialects are unable to converse with speakers of another dialect of Arabic in particular, while Middle Easterners can generally understand one another, they often have trouble understanding Maghrebis (although the converse is not true, due to the popularity of Middle Easternespecially Egyptianfilms and other media).
One factor in the differentiation of the dialects is influence from the languages previously spoken in the areas, which have typically provided a significant number of new words, and have sometimes also influenced pronunciation or word order however, a much more significant factor for most dialects is, as among Romance languages, retention (or change of meaning) of different classical forms. Thus Iraqi ''aku'', Levantine ''fiih'', and North African ''kayen'' all mean "there is", and all come from Arabic (''yakuun'', ''fiihi'', ''kaa'in'' respectively), but now sound very different.
The major groups are:
Egyptian Arabic
Maghreb Arabic (Algerian Arabic, Moroccan Arabic, Tunisian Arabic and western Libyan)
Levantine Arabic (Western Syrian, Lebanese, Palestinian, and western Jordanian, Cypriot Maronite Arabic)
Iraqi Arabic (Khuzestani Arabic), which has significant Persian influence and is not understood by most other Arabic speakers
Gulf Arabic (Eastern Syrian, Kuwaiti, Saudi Arabian, Persian Gulf coast from Iraq to Oman including much of Saudi Arabia's Eastern Province, and minorities on the other side)
Other varieties include:
(in Mauritania and western Sahara)
Andalusi Arabic (extinct, but important role in literary history)
Maltese
Sudanese Arabic (with a dialect continuum into Chad)
Baharna Arabic (Bahrain, Saudi Eastern Province, and Oman)
Hijazi Arabic (west coast of Saudi Arabia, Northern Saudi Arabia, eastern Jordan, Western Iraq)
Najdi Arabic (Najd region of central Saudi Arabia)
Yemeni Arabic (Yemen to southern Saudi Arabia)
Sounds
The phonemes below reflect the pronunciation of Standard Arabic.
Vowels
Arabic has three vowels, with their long forms, plus two diphthongs: ''a'' (open ''e'' as in English ''bed'', but centralised), ''i'' , ''u'' '' '' , '' '' , '' '' ''ai'' (''ay'') , ''au'' (''aw'') . Allophonically, after velarized consonants (see following), the vowel ''a'' is pronounced , '' '' as (thus also after ''r''), ''ai'' as and ''au'' as .
Consonants
class "wikitable" style "text align: center "
'''Standard Arabic consonant phonemes''' CAPTION
! rowspan "2" COLSPAN 2
! rowspan "2" Bilabial
! rowspan "2" Inter br dental
! colspan "2" Dental
! rowspan "2" Post bralveolar
! rowspan "2" Palatal
! rowspan "2" Velar
! rowspan "2" Uvular
! rowspan "2" Pharyn BRgeal
! rowspan "2" Glottal
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " plain
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " emphatic
! style "text align: left " ROWSPAN 2 Stop
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " voiceless
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " voiced
! style "text align: left " ROWSPAN 2 Fricative
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " voiceless
! style "text align: left font size: 80 " voiced
! style "text align: left " COLSPAN 2 Nasal
rowspan "2"
rowspan "2"
! style "text align: left " COLSPAN 2 Lateral
! style "text align: left " COLSPAN 2 Trill
! style "text align: left " COLSPAN 2 Approximant
See Arabic alphabet for explanations on the IPA phonetic symbols found in this chart.
is pronounced as by some speakers. This is especially characteristic of the Egyptian and southern Yemeni dialects. In many parts of North Africa and in the Levant, it is pronounced as .
is pronounced only in , the name of God, i.e. Allah, when the word follows ''a'', '' '', ''u'' or '' '' (after ''i'' or '' '' it is unvelarised: ''bismi l l h'' ).
is usually a phonetic approximant.
In many varieties (if not most), are actually epiglottal (despite what is reported in many earlier works).
The consonants traditionally termed "emphatic" are either velarised or pharyngealised . In some transcription systems, emphasis is shown by capitalizing the letter e.g. is written D in others the letter is underlined or has a dot below it e.g. .
Vowels and consonants can be (phonologically) short or long. Long (geminate) consonants are normally written doubled in Latin transcription (i.e. bb, dd, etc.), reflecting the presence of the Arabic diacritic mark shaddah, which marks lengthened consonants. Such consonants are held twice as long as short consonants. This consonant lengthening is phonemically contrastive: e.g. ''qabala'' "he received" and ''qabbala'' "he kissed".
Syllable structure
Arabic has two kinds of syllable: open syllables (CV) and (CVV) and closed syllables (CVC), (CVVC) and (CVCC). Every syllable begins with a consonant or else a consonant is borrowed from a previous word through elision especially in the case of the definite article THE, ''al'' (used when starting an utterance) or '' l'' (when following a word), e.g. ''baytu l mudiir'' house (of) the director , which becomes ''bay tul mu diir'' when divided syllabically. By itself, definite ''mudiir'' would be pronounced .
Stress
Although word stress is not phonemically contrastive in Standard Arabic, it does bear a strong relationship to vowel length and syllable shape, and correct word stress aids intelligibility. In general, "heavy" syllables attract stress (i.e. syllables of longer duration a closed syllable or a syllable with a long vowel). In a word with a syllable with one long vowel, the long vowel attracts the stress (e.g. ''ki 'taab'' and '' kaa tib''). In a word with two long vowels, the second long vowel attracts stress (e.g.''ma kaa 'tiib''). In a word with a "heavy" syllable where two consonants occur together or the same consonant is doubled, the (last) heavy syllable attracts stress (e.g. ''ya ma niyy'', ''ka 'tabt'', ''ka tab na'', ma jal lah,'' mad ra sah'', ''yur sil na''). This last rule trumps the first two: ''ja zaa i riyy''. Otherwise, word stress typically falls on the first syllable: '' ya man'', '' ka ta bat'', etc. The Cairo (Egyptian Arabic) dialect, however, has some idiosyncrasies in that a heavy syllable may not carry stress more than two syllables from the end of a word, so that ''mad ra sah'' carries the stress on the second to last syllable, as does ''qaa hi rah''.
Dialectal variations
In some dialects, there may be more or fewer phonemes than those listed in the chart above. For example, non Arabic is used in the Maghreb dialects as well in the written language mostly for foreign names. Semitic became extremely early on in Arabic before it was written down a few modern Arabic dialects, such as Iraqi (influenced by Persian) distinguish between and . Interdental fricatives ( and ) are rendered as stops and in some dialects (principally Levantine and Egyptian) and as and in "learned" words from the Standard language. Early in the expansion of Arabic, the separate emphatic phonemes and coallesced into a single phoneme, becoming one or the other. Predictably, dialects without interdental fricatives use exclusively, while those with such fricatives use . Again, in "learned" words from the Standard language, is rendered as in dialects without interdental fricatives. Another key distinguishing mark of Arabic dialects is how they render Standard (a voiceless uvular stop): it retains its original pronunciation in widely scattered regions such as Yemen and Morocco (and among the Druze), while it is rendered in Gulf Arabic, Iraqi Arabic, Upper Egypt and less urban parts of the Levant (e.g. Jordan) and as a glottal stop in many prestige dialects, such as those spoken in Cairo, Beirut and Damascus. Thus, Arabs instantly give away their geographical (and class) origin by their pronunciation of a word such as ''qamar'' "moon": , or .
Grammar
''See Arabic grammar''
Writing system
''Main article: Arabic alphabet''
The Arabic alphabet derives from the Aramaic script (which variety Nabataean or Syriac is a matter of scholarly dispute), to which it bears a loose resemblance like that of Coptic or Cyrillic script to Greek script. Traditionally, there were several differences between the Western (Maghrebi) and Eastern version of the alphabetin particular, the ''fa'' and ''qaf'' had a dot underneath and a single dot above respectively in the Maghreb, and the order of the letters was slightly different (at least when they were used as numerals). However, the old Maghrebi variant has been abandoned except for calligraphic purposes in the Maghreb itself, and remains in use mainly in the Quranic schools (zaouias) of West Africa. Arabic, like other Semitic languages, is written from right to left.
Calligraphy
''See Arabic calligraphy for a fuller overview.''
After the definitive fixing of the Arabic script around 786, by Khalil ibn Ahmad al Farahidi, many styles were developed, both for the writing down of the Qur'an and other books, and for inscriptions on monuments as decoration.
center! Unsourced image removed: center
Arabic calligraphy has not fallen out of use as in the Western world, and is still considered by Arabs as a major art form calligraphers are held in great esteem. Being cursive by nature, unlike the Latin alphabet, Arabic script is used to write down a verse of the Qur'an, a Hadith, or simply a proverb, in a spectacular composition. The composition is often abstract, but sometimes the writing is shaped into an actual form such as that of an animal. Two of the current masters of the genre are Hassan Massoudy and .
Transliteration
''See Arabic transliteration and Arabic Chat Alphabet for more information.''
There are a number of different standards of Arabic transliteration: methods of accurately and efficiently representing Arabic with the Latin alphabet. The more scientific standards allow the reader to recreate the exact word using the Arabic alphabet. However, these systems are heavily reliant on diacritical marks such as " " for the English ''sh'' sound. At first sight, this may be difficult to recognize. Less scientific, systems often use digraphs (like ''sh'' and ''kh''), which are usually more simple to read, but sacrifice the definiteness of the scientific systems. In some cases, the ''sh'' or ''kh'' sounds can be represented by italicizing or underlining them that way, they can be distinguished from separate ''s'' and ''h'' sounds or ''k'' and ''h'' sounds, respectively. (Compare ''gashouse'' to ''gash''.)
During the last few decades and especially since the 1990s, Western invented text communication technologies have become prevalent in the Arab world, such as personal computers, the World Wide Web, email, Bulletin board systems, IRC, instant messaging and mobile phone text messaging. Most of these technologies originally had the ability to communicate using the Latin alphabet only, and some of them still do not have the Arabic alphabet as an optional feature. As a result, Arabic speaking users communicated in these technologies by transliterating the Arabic text using the Latin script, sometime known as IM Arabic.
To handle those Arabic letters that cannot be accurately represented using the Latin script, numerals and other characters were appropriated. For example, the numeral "3" may be used to represent the Arabic letter " ", ''ayn''. There is no universal name for this type of transliteration, but some have named it Arabic Chat Alphabet. Other systems of transliteration exist, such as using dots or capitalization to represent the "emphatic" counterparts of certain consonants. For instance, using capitalization, the letter " ", or ''daal'', may be represented by '''d'''. Its emphatic counterpart, " ", may be written as '''D'''.
Literature
Kees Versteegh, ''The Arabic Language'', Edinburgh University Press (1997).
See also
Varieties of Arabic
Learn Standard Arabic WikiBook
Arabist
Arabic literature
List of common phrases in various languages
Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic
External links
a multiplatform and multilingual office suite.
on line access to Arabic newspapers, radio, and television
. Arabic Writing and Reading Course Online with MP3 audio.
from
Web references and examples:
with audio samples
: from the Rosetta Edition.
: Write and send Arabic emails without having an Arabic keyboard or operating system.
Over 4 millions words!
Arabic languages samples:
Category:Arab
af:Arabies
ang:Arabisc spr c
ar:
ast:Idioma rabe
bg:
bs:Arapski jezik
ca:Llengua rab
cs:Arab tina
cy:Arabeg
da:Arabisk
de:Arabische Sprache
et:Araabia keel
el:
es:Idioma rabe
eo:Araba lingvo
fa:
fr:Arabe
fy:Arabysk
ga:Araibis
gl:Lingua rabe
ko:
haw: lelo Alapia
hi:
io:Arabiana linguo
id:Bahasa Arab
is:Arab ska
it:Lingua araba
he:
ka:
kw:Arabek
sw:Kiarabu
la:Lingua Arabica
lv:Ar bu valoda
lt:Arab kalba
li:Arabisch
hu:Arab nyelv
mk:
ms:Bahasa Arab
nl:Arabisch
nds:Araabsche Spraak
ja:
no:Arabisk spr k
nn:Arabisk spr k
pl:J zyk arabski
pt:L ngua rabe
ro:Limba arab
ru:
simple:Arabic language
sk:Arab ina
sl:Arab ina
sr:
fi:Arabian kieli
sv:Arabiska
tl:Wikang Arabo
tt: r p tele
th:
tr:Arap a
zh:
kn:
Infobox Film
name Apocalypse Now
image Apocalypse now dvd cover.jpg
imdb id 0078788
producer Francis Ford Coppola
director Francis Ford Coppola
writer Joseph Conrad (novel)brJohn Milius Francis Ford Coppola (screenplay), Michael Herr (narration)
starring Martin SheenbrMarlon BrandobrRobert Duvall
music Carmine Coppola Francis Ford Coppola
cinematography Vittorio Storaro
editing Lisa FruchtmanbrGerald B. Greenberg brWalter Murch
distributor United Artists
released May 10, 1979
runtime 153 min.br 202 min. (Redux)
language English
budget 31,500,000
'''''Apocalypse Now''''' is a 1979 American film directed by Francis Ford Coppola from a script by John Milius (rewritten by Coppola) which was inspired by Joseph Conrad's classic novella ''Heart of Darkness''. Set during the Vietnam War, the film tells the story of a taciturn American soldier who is sent to "terminate with extreme prejudice" the command of a rogue United States Army Special Forces colonel. The narrative of his journey and its culmination are studded with events which, while bizarre, are based on real Vietnam stories. The soldier's journey becomes increasingly nonlinear and hallucinatory. Coppola's agenda clearly involves larger themes the film's subtext concerns a journey into the darkness of the human psyche.
The film features performances by Martin Sheen as Captain Benjamin L. Willard (Marlow in Conrad's novel), Marlon Brando as Colonel Walter E. Kurtz, Dennis Hopper as a fast talking hallucinogen using photojournalist, and Robert Duvall in an Oscar nominated turn as the borderline psychotic Lt. Colonel Kilgore. Several other actors who were (or later became) prominent stars had minor or supporting roles in the movie including Harrison Ford, R. Lee Ermey and Laurence Fishburne (who, only fourteen years old when shooting began in March 1976, was credited as 'Larry Fishburne').
The movie poster art for ''Apocalypse Now'' is one of the more famous paintings by Bob Peak, who is considered an influential artist in the world of film when it comes to movie posters.
Background
Filmed in the Philippines (most notably the Pagsanjan River and Hidden Valley Springs), the film went far over budget and schedule: a typhoon destroyed many of the sets, the Philippine Air Force helicopters used for shooting were constantly called back by President Ferdinand Marcos to be used in actual combat, the lead role was recast (Martin Sheen replaced Harvey Keitel after shooting had begun), Sheen then had a near fatal heart attack, Brando was intractable and out of shape, and Coppola himself was mentally fragile. Being similar in appearance and remarkably similar in voice, Martin Sheen's brother Joe Estevez stood in for the unwell Sheen in much of the film and some of the narration is by him.
After the first edit, the film was six hours long and had to be severely edited the original released version was just over two and a half hours long. (Coppola re released the film in 2001 under the title ''Apocalypse Now Redux'', restoring footage and sequences and lifting the running time to 200 minutes. Recent rumors have persisted that Coppola is considering releasing the true original cut on DVD, but there has been no fruition or conformation of this.) For background information on the film, see Eleanor Coppola's documentary, ''Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse'', released in 1991.
Synopsis
U.S. Army Captain Benjamin L. Willard is stationed in Saigon a seasoned veteran, he is deeply troubled and apparently no longer fit for civilian life. A group of intelligence officers approach him with a special mission up river into the remote Cambodian jungle to find Colonel Walter E. Kurtz, a former member of the United States Army Special Forces.
They state that Kurtz, once considered a model officer and future general, has apparently gone insane and is commanding a legion of his own Montagnard troops deep in neutral Cambodia. Their claims are supported by very disturbing radio broadcasts and or recordings made by Kurtz himself. Willard is asked to undertake a mission to find Kurtz and dispose of him "with extreme prejudice."
Willard studies the intelligence files during the boat ride to the river entrance and learns that Kurtz, isolated in his compound, has assumed the role of a warlord and is worshipped by the natives and his own loyal men. Another officer, sent earlier to kill Kurtz, has apparently become one of his lieutenants.
Willard will begin his trip up the Mekong River on a PBR (Patrol Boat, River), with an eclectic crew composed of by the book and formal Chief Phillips, a black Navy boat commander GM3 Lance B. Johnson, a tanned all American California surfer GM3 Tyrone, AKA "Clean", a black 17 year old from The Bronx and the Cajun Engineman, Jay "Chef" Hicks.
The PBR arrives at a Landing Zone where Willard and the crew meet up with Lt. Colonel Bill Kilgore, the merciless commander of the AirCav in the region, following a massive and hectic mopping up operation of a conquered enemy town. Kilgore, a keen surfer, befriends Johnson. Later, he learns from one of his men that the beach down the coast which marks the opening to the river is perfect for surfing, a factor which persuades him to capture it. The problem is, his troops say, it's "Charlie's point" and heavily fortified. Dismissing this complaint with the explanation that "Charlie don't surf!", Kilgore orders his men to saddle up in the morning so that the AirCav can capture the town and the beach. Riding high above the coast in a fleet of Hueys accompanied by H 6s, Kilgore launches an attack on the beach. The scene, famous for its use of Richard Wagner's epic "Ride of the Valkyries", ends with the soldiers surfing the barely claimed beach amidst skirmishes between infantry and VC. After helicopters swoop over the village and demolish all visible signs of resistance, a giant napalm strike in the nearby jungle dramatically marks the climax of the battle. "I love the smell of napalm in the morning smells like...victory," Kilgore exults to Willard. The quote made it to 12 onto the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes, a list of top movie quotes.
The lighting and mood darken as the boat navigates upstream and Willard's silent obsession with Kurtz deepens. Episodes on the journey include a run in with a tiger while Willard and Chef search for mango fruits, an impromptu inspection of a Vietnamese sampan that leads to massacre, a surreal stop at the last American outpost during a Vietnamese attack against a wood bridge under construction there, and the shocking deaths of both "Clean" and Chief Phillips during a gunfire ambush with hidden Viet Cong soldiers and a spear thrown by a native on the shore, respectively.
Once arrived at Kurtz's compound, Willard leaves Chef behind with orders to call in an air strike on the village if he does not return. They are met by a borderline psychotic freelance photographer (Hopper) who explains Kurtz's greatness and philosophic skills to provoke his people into following him. Brought before Kurtz and held in captivity in a darkened temple, Willard s constitution appears to weaken as Kurtz lectures him on his theories of war, humanity, and civilization. Kurtz explains his motives and philisophy in a famous and haunting monolgue:
'' I've seen horrors... horrors that you've seen. But you have no right to call me a murderer. You have a right to kill me. You have a right to do that... but you have no right to judge me. It's impossible for words to describe what is necessary to those who do not know what horror means. Horror. Horror has a face... and you must make a friend of horror. Horror and moral terror are your friends. If they are not then they are enemies to be feared. They are truly enemies. I remember when I was with Special Forces. Seems a thousand centuries ago. We went into a camp to inoculate the children. We left the camp after we had inoculated the children for Polio, and this old man came running after us and he was crying. He couldn't see. We went back there and they had come and hacked off every inoculated arm. There they were in a pile. A pile of little arms. And I remember... I... I... I cried. I wept like some grandmother. I wanted to tear my teeth out. I didn't know what I wanted to do. And I want to remember it. I never want to forget it. I never want to forget.
''And then I realized... like I was shot... like I was shot with a diamond... a diamond bullet right through my forehead. And I thought: My God... the genius of that. The genius. The will to do that. Perfect, genuine, complete, crystalline, pure. And then I realized they were stronger than we. Because they could stand that these were not monsters. These were men... trained cadres. These men who fought with their hearts, who had families, who had children, who were filled with love... but they had the strength... the strength... to do that. If I had ten divisions of those men our troubles here would be over very quickly. You have to have men who are moral... and at the same time who are able to utilize their primordial instincts to kill without feeling... without passion... without judgment... without judgment.'' '''Because it's judgment that defeats us'''.''
While bound outside in the pouring rain, Willard is approached by Kurtz, who places the severed head of Chef in his lap. Coppola makes little explicit, but we come to believe that Willard and Kurtz develop an understanding nonetheless Kurtz wishes to die at Willard's hands, and Willard, having subsequently granted Kurtz his wish, is offered the chance to succeed him in his warlord demigod role. Juxtaposed with a ceremonial slaughtering of a water buffalo, Willard enters Kurtz's chamber during one of his message recordings, and kills him with a machete (This entire sequence is set to The End by The Doors). Lying bloody and dying on the ground, Kurtz whispers "The horror...the horror." (This line is taken directly from Conrad's novella.) Willard walks through the now silent crowd of natives until he comes upon Lance, who seems to have integrated himself into the society. The two of them make their way to the PBR and float away as Kurtz's final words echo in the wind as the screen fades to black.
''Redux''
In 2001 Coppola released ''Apocalypse Now: Redux'', which restored 49 minutes of scenes that were cut from the original film, including stopovers at a French rubber plantation wherein Mr. Clean is buried and a rain soaked American base camp. Nudity absent from the original was also included in the Redux, most notably at the French plantation and in an additional scene with the Playboy playmates (from the USO show.)
In this version, Willard steals Kilgore's surfboard, which can still be seen briefly onboard the PBR in the original cut.
Alternate Endings
Coppola denied having any actual alternative endings. In the DVD commentary, he states that they simply had a massive amount of footage to edit with and thus had some choices to make. They did consider using the explosion footage made during their destruction of the Kurtz compound, but he later decided that implying that the air strike had been called in was contrary to his wish to offer some slight hope that we could overcome the horrors of war.
However, there are multiple slightly varying versions of the ending credits.
One version, from the 70mm release, ends with no credits, and shows the boat pulling away. Another version, for the 35mm wide release, rolls the credits while the Kurtz compound is destroyed in what must be assumed was an air strike. Yet another version ends silently, without the explosions, and the credits roll over a black background.
Themes
''Apocalypse Now'' is a thematically rich film. The primary motif of the film is that of ''Heart of Darkness'', i.e. an odyssey into the darkness of humanity.
Willard's constant narration gives us a glimpse into his fractured psychological state particularly in the opening scenes where he lies in his bed and stares blankly into the ceiling. He relates that he is on his second tour of duty and that he returned because he was unable to re integrate himself into civilian life.
:''Saigon... shit I'm still only in Saigon... Every time I think I'm gonna wake up back in the jungle. When I was home after my first tour, it was worse. I'd wake up and there'd be nothing. I hardly said a word to my wife, until I said "yes" to a divorce. When I was here, I wanted to be there when I was there, all I could think of was getting back into the jungle. I'm here a week now... waiting for a mission... getting softer every minute I stay in this room, I get weaker, and every minute Charlie squats in the bush, he gets stronger. Each time I looked around, the walls moved in a little tighter.''
This chilling monologue besides suggesting how man is connected to war is also an allusion to post traumatic stress disorder, a condition common to many Vietnam veterans. Willard's quest for Kurtz's compound parallels Kurtz's own descent into madness. He never tells his fellow shipmates of the PBR the true purpose of the mission and in a chilling scene, after his crew massacres people sailing on a sampan, Willard murders the surviving girl. Kurtz who was a committed family man and a highly respected colonel is driven insane after witnessing a vile incident commited by his enemies while on a peacekeeping mission. He realised that he can never win the war unless he surrenders his morality and kill without judgment. For Kurtz, this action drove him insane and so he gathered other disillusioned soldiers and started a strange, bizarre civilization in the Cambodian forest.
This is a subtle allusion to the bureaucracy that directs soldiers in the war. The bureaucrats propagandized the Vietnam War as a just cause to save the world from the evil of Communism.
The general public and several Vietnam war veterans fiercely condemned the war and believed that the government lied and misled the public.
Even Willard who is assigned the mission is cynical about his mission from the beginning :
: ''Charging a man with murder in this place was like handing out speeding tickets at the Indy 500''
The climax at Kurtz's compound is the most confusing and the most frequently debated aspect of the film. Several critics believe it to be anticlimactic after the earlier more action oriented scenes and also the fact that it differs greatly from other war films in that there's no final battle scenario.
Roger Ebert in his original review defends the ending:
:''Coppola doesn't have an ending, if we or he expected the closing scenes to pull everything together and make sense of it. Nobody should have been surprised. "Apocalypse Now" doesn't tell any kind of a conventional story, doesn't have a thought out message for us about Vietnam, has no answers, and thus needs no ending.The way the film ends now, with Brando's fuzzy, brooding monologues and the final violence, feels much more satisfactory than any conventional ending possibly could.''
When Willard arrives, he is captured and put into containment as he is 'interrogated' by Kurtz who lectures and drones on about his philosophies. While other interpretations exist, it can be assumed that Kurtz wishes to die a soldier's death and has been waiting for his death. But his followers refuse to kill him and Colby(Scott Glenn) who was sent to kill him ended up joining his 'tribe'. He wishes or rather hopes that Willard would be able to do so. Willard, at first does not want to as he too is converted by Kurtz's beliefs but after Kurtz's monologue and his statement on judgment, Willard understands Kurtz's desire and so decides to complete his mission by subverting his moral judgment and justifies it to himself
:''Everybody wanted me to do it, him most of all. I felt like he was up there, waiting for me to take the pain away. He just wanted to go out like a soldier, standing up, not like some poor, wasted, rag assed renegade. Even the jungle wanted him dead, and that's who he really took his orders from anyway.''
The 'jungle' is seen as a metaphor to nature or more specifically man's human nature. After killing Kurtz, Willard is revered by the denizens of Kurtz's tribe but he instead leaves suggesting that perhaps he is capable of escaping the horror of war.
Responses
''Apocalypse Now'' premiered in 1979 to mixed reviews and received polarized responses from the audiences. It is said that it was as lauded as it was reviled. Many critics slammed the film, calling it overly pretentious, while others felt that it ended anticlimatically after a splendid first act.
Roger Ebert, who hailed it as the best film of 1979 and added it to his list of Great Movies stated:
:"Apocalypse Now is the best Vietnam film, one of the greatest of all films, because it pushes beyond the others, into the dark places of the soul. It is not about war so much as about how war reveals truths we would be happy never to discover."
Today, the film is regarded by many as a masterpiece of the New Hollywood era. It is on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list at number 28. Kilgore's quote "I love the smell of napalm in the morning" was number 12 on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes list. ''Sight and Sound'' magazine polled several critics to name the best film of the last 25 years and ''Apocalypse Now'' was named number 1.
The catastrophic production of the film unfortunately made it symbol of the dangers of excessive directorial control over a film. The production was said to have taken a toll on Coppola, both mentally and emotionally. To many cinephiles, ''Apocalypse Now'' is the last great film of a legendary director whose subsequent films have failed to match it in quality.
Adaptation
Although inspired by Joseph Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness'', the film deviates extensively from it. The novel takes place in the Belgian Congo in the 19th century Kurtz and Marlow (who is named Willard in the movie) are commercial agents of a Belgian ivory company that brutally exploits its African native workers. In the novel, Marlow is sent to bring the ailing Kurtz home in the movie, Willard is sent to kill Kurtz.
The character of Kilgore is an invention of the screenwriters. Nevertheless, Coppola has maintained many episodes (the spear and arrow attack on the boat, for example) that respect the spirit of the novel and in particular its critique of the concept of civilization and progress. The fact that Coppola substituted European colonization with American interventionism does not change the universal message of the book.
Influence
As one of the most iconic films of the 20th century, the film has been referenced and parodied countless times.
Film
The film was parodied in a short film called ''Porklips Now'', about health inspector Will Dullard, who makes a trip to inspect the meat processing shop of a man named Mertz.
British film ''Nil by Mouth'', by ''Gary Oldman'', has a scene where the character Danny (played by ''Steve Sweeney'') dubs the scene that the photojournalist talks to Cap. Willard (when he is in the wood cage), as the film is played on a TV.
In ''True Romance'', Clarence Worley calls ''Apocalypse Now'' "the greatest Vietnam film ever made".
''Apocalypse Pooh'' is a nine minute short which marries visuals from ''Winnie the Pooh'' cartoons with audio from ''Apocalypse Now''. Amazingly, they fit perfectly, following the basic plot well.
''Hot Shots! Part Deux'' starring Sheen's son Charlie Sheen parodies the film. Martin Sheen, appearing once again as Willard, and Charlie Sheen's character ''Topper'' are depicted staring at each other while passing in opposite directions on PBRs on a river. As they meet each shouts in unison, "I loved you in Wall Street!".
Another movie starring Charlie Sheen, ''The Chase'', has a gag scene after the end credits, in which Sheen quotes Kilgore's famous napalm line.
In ''Jarhead'', shortly before "Swoff" and the guys are sent into action, they are watching ''Apocalypse Now'' in a theater inside the base, singing along and interacting with the infamous helicopter attack scene, much in the way one would at a ''Rocky Horror Picture Show'' screening. Oddly enough, Walter Murch was editor sound designer for both Apocalypse Now Jarhead.
In ''Back to the Future 2'', right after Marty meets up with Doc and the police take Jennifer away, you can see a sign behind them reading "Surf Vietnam."
Television
In an episode of ''Seinfeld'', Elaine Benes visits her employer, J. Peterman, in a scene that parodies Willard's eventual meeting with Kurtz.
The same scene is also parodied in an episode of ''Sealab 2021'', with Captain Murphy as Kurtz and Marco as Willard.
Parodied in the episode "Kamp Krusty" of ''The Simpsons'' with Bart assuming the role of Kurtz. Marge Simpson also tells her husband, Homer, in another episode, ''"your character provides the comic relief, like Marlon Brando in Apocalypse Now"''. The 'Ride of the Valkyries' helicopter sequence was humorously homaged in a "Treehouse of Horror" short.
In an episode of ''The Critic'', one of the films Jay Sherman reviews is a musical remake titled "Apocalypse Wow."
The episode "Eekpocalypse Now!" of the cartoon series ''Eek! the Cat'' cast Eek as Willard, Elmo the Elk as Colonel Kilgore and Sharky the Sharkdog as Colonel Kurtz.
In the ''Buffy the Vampire Slayer'' episode "Restless," contains Xander's dream version of ''Apocalypse Now'', including Principal Snyder as Kurtz.
Claymation cartoonist Corky Quakenbush produced "''A Pack of Gifts Now''", which is part of his Rudolph Trilogy (the other two being "''Raging Rudolph''" and "''The Reinfather''.") The short is set in Saskatchewan, with Rudolph in the Willard role and Santa Claus in the Kurtz role. Rudolph's mission is to "terminate the Kringle (Santa) with extreme prejudice." This short would air on the Christmas edition of ''MadTV'' in 1999.
In the TV series ''Scrubs'', the episode "My Heavy Meddle" ends with the janitors comment: " The horror!", quoting Kurtz.
In an episode of ''Animaniacs'', Warner Brothers sends Yakko, Wakko and Dot Warner on a mission to stop a crazed movie director (a parody of Jerry Lewis) from filming a movie the studio had cancelled. The trio find the director, who has created a kingdom for himself in which stunt doubles worship him. They stop the film and smash him with a 50 ton weight. His last words are "The hurting... the hurting..." Throughout the episode, a singer who looks very much like Jim Morrison drones "This is the ending, the ending of our story, the ending."
"Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man," an ''X Files'' episode features a flashback scene where "the Cigarette Smoking Man" is tasked with the assassination of John F. Kennedy. The scene has many things similar or identical to the Scene where Willard is tasked with the assassination of Kurtz, most prominently both have a question that goes something like "have you ever met myself this man or the general before?" to which Willard and the CSM both reply "Not personally".
The cartoon ''Yvon of the Yukon'' has an episode that parodies the opening scene, as well as a helicopter pilot stating "I love the smell of lip balm in the morning"
In a sketch in Alas Smith and Jones, Mel Smith sits in a darkened room and expresses philosophies similar to that of Kurtz at length to a man who has been sent to find him, at the end of the sketch Griff Rhys Jones switches on the light to reveal that they are in fact sitting in a rather mundane bathroom with Smith sitting in the bath. Jones (a fairly dull tax inspector perched on the toilet) reveals that he is merely investigating Smith for Child benefit fraud.
Music
Iron Maiden's "The Edge of Darkness" on their album ''The X Factor'' (1995) is very closely based on the film. Most lyrics are very close to being a direct quote from the movie.
The Canadian band Death From Above 1979 take their name from the 'Death From Above' motto on Kilgore's helicopter.
The band Dismember uses the quote "I love the smell of napalm in the morning!" to start of their song "Let the Napalm Rain."
The band Sodom uses the full quote, including "smells like... victory" in their song "Napalm in the Morning".
The band Ministry uses a sample of Dennis Hopper saying "Alright, it's alright" on their song "N.W.O."
The band The Clash's song "Charlie Don't Surf" from their album Sandinista! derives its title and concept from the movie.
The band Milhaven samples extensively from Kurtz's monologue at the end of the film in their song "Drink a Pint of Blood a Day."
Jedi Mind Tricks use a few clips on their CD release Violent By Design.
2Pacalypse Now was rapper Tupac Shakur's debut album, released in November 1991.
The Dead Milkmen song "Beach Party Vietnam" is a parody of the surfing scene, and the Vietnam War in general.
Fall Silent incorporates a clip of Marlow's "The Horror...the horror" in their song entitled "The Great White Death."
Video games
In the videogame ''World of Warcraft'', a series of quests in the Stranglethorn Vale zone take you to the camp of a crazed Colonel Kurzen who has brainwashed his men, in an attempt to kill the Colonel.
In a homage to the infamous village attack scene, the computer game "Battlefield Vietnam" offers up "Ride of the Valkyries" as a song to be played while inside helicopters and other vehicles.
The Half Life singleplayer mod 'Heart of Evil' is partly inspired by the film (the Vietnam War setting, a U.S. Army captain sent to assassinate a rogue colonel, the helicopter ride with "Ride of the Valkyries" in the background, the boat ride to the colonel's compound).
In StarCraft, one of the Firebat's quotes is "I love the smell of napalm." The Firebats are flamethrower wielding infantry.
Literature
The ''Star Wars'' novel ''Shatterpoint'', written by Matthew Stover, is based on ''Apocalypse Now''.
Before the members of the SAS patrol leave England in the book Bravo Two Zero by Andy McNab, they watch ''Apocalypse Now''.
Primary cast
Marlon Brando Col. Walter E. Kurtz
Martin Sheen Capt. Benjamin L. Willard
Dennis Hopper "American photojournalist"
Robert Duvall Lt. Col. Bill Kilgore
Frederic Forrest "Chef", sailor
Albert Hall Chief Phillips, Navy boat commander
Sam Bottoms Lance B. Johnson, sailor and famous surfer
Laurence Fishburne Tyrone, AKA "Clean", sailor
G. D. Spradlin Gen. Corman, G 2
Harrison Ford Col. Lucas, aide to Corman
Scott Glenn Lt. Richard M. Colby, previously assigned Willard's current mission
Tom Mason supply sgt.
Colleen Camp Playmate, "Miss May"
'''Award wins:'''
Cannes Film Festival : Palme d'Or
Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Vittorio Storaro)
Academy Award for Sound (Richard Beggs, Mark Berger, Nathan Boxer and Walter Murch)
Golden Globe Award for Best Director (Francis Ford Coppola)
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)
Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score Motion Picture (Carmine Coppola Francis Ford Coppola)
In 2000 the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.
It is widely believed that ''Apocalypse Now'' did not win the Best Picture Oscar in 1979 due to the fact that another Vietnam epic, ''The Deer Hunter'', had just won the previous year. It is often regarded as a far superior film to the 1979 winner of the award, ''Kramer vs. Kramer''.
'''Award nominations:'''
Academy Award for Best Picture
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture Drama
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)
Academy Award for Best Art Direction Set Decoration (Angelo P. Graham, George R. Nelson and Dean Tavoularis)
Academy Award for Directing (Francis Ford Coppola)
Academy Award for Film Editing (Lisa Fruchtman, Gerald B. Greenberg, Richard Marks and Walter Murch)
Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (Francis Ford Coppola John Milius)
WGA Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the Screen (John Milius Francis Ford Coppola)
Grammy Award for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture (Carmine Coppola Francis Ford Coppola)
Quotes
"You smell that? Do you smell that? ... Napalm, son. Nothing else in the world smells like that. I love the smell of napalm in the morning. You know, one time we had a hill bombed, for twelve hours. When it was all over I walked up. We didn't find one of 'em, not one stinkin' dink body. The smell, you know that gasoline smell, the whole hill. Smelled like ... victory. Someday this war's gonna end." Lt. Col. Bill Kilgore
"I watched a snail crawl along the edge of a straight razor. That's my dream. That's my nightmare. Crawling, slithering, along the edge of a straight razor, and surviving." Col. Walter E. Kurtz (on tape)
"We train young men to drop fire on people, but their commanders won't allow them to write nowiki'fuck' nowiki on their airplanes because ... it's obscene!" Col. Walter E. Kurtz
"They were gonna make me a major for this, and I wasn't even in their fuckin' army anymore." Captain Willard
"Charging a man with murder in this place was like handing out speeding tickets at the Indy 500" Willard, when beginning his assigned mission
"What are they going to say? That he was a kind man? That he was a wise man? That he had plans? Bullshit!" The photojournalist to Willard, on how Kurtz will be remembered
"Never get out of the boat!" Chef
"I wanted a mission, and for my sins they gave me one. Brought it up to me like room service. It was a real choice mission, and after it was done, I'd never want another." Willard.
External links
! Robert Duvall
Category:1979 films
Category:Best Picture Oscar Nominee
Category:Best Supporting Actor Oscar Nominee (film)
Category:Cult films
Category:Films based on short fiction
Category:Films directed by Francis Ford Coppola
Category:Palme d'Or winners
Category:United States National Film Registry
Category:Vietnam War films
Category:Anti Military Movies
da:Apocalypse Now
de:Apocalypse Now
es:Apocalypse Now
fr:Apocalypse Now
io:Apocalypse Now
it:Apocalypse Now
he:
nl:Apocalypse Now
ja:
no:Apokalypse n !
pl:Czas Apokalipsy
pt:Apocalypse Now
ru: ( )
sk:Apokalypsa (film)
sv:Apocalypse
zh:
Infobox Celebrity
name Alfred Hitchcock
image Alfred Hitchcock.JPG
caption Alfred Hitchcock introduces the ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'' episode "The Sorcerer's Apprentice."
birth date 13 August 1899
birth place Leytonstone, London, UK
death date 29 April 1980
death place Bel Air, Los Angeles, USA
occupation film director and producer
spouse Alma Reville
'''Sir Alfred Joseph Hitchcock''' KBE (13 August 189929 April 1980) was a British born film director and producer, closely associated with the suspense thriller genre. He began directing in the United Kingdom before working mostly in the United States from 1939 onwards, taking out dual citizenship in 1956. He directed more than fifty feature films in a career spanning six decades, from the silent film era, through the invention of talkies, to the color era. Hitchcock remains one of the best known and most popular directors of all time, famous for his expert and largely unrivaled control of pace and suspense throughout his movies.
Hitchcock's films draw heavily on both fear and fantasy, and are known for their droll humour. They often portray innocent people caught up in circumstances beyond their control or understanding. This often involves a ''transference of guilt'' in which the "innocent" character's failings are transferred to another character and magnified. Another common theme is the exploration of the compatibility of men and women Hitchcock's films often take a cynical view of traditional romantic relationships.
Although Hitchcock was an enormous star during his lifetime, he was not usually ranked highly by contemporaneous film critics. ''Rebecca'' was the only one of his films to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, although four others were nominated. Hitchcock never won the Academy Award for Best Director. He was awarded the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award for lifetime achievement in 1967, but never personally received an Academy Award of Merit. The French New Wave critics, especially ric Rohmer, Claude Chabrol, and Fran ois Truffaut, were among the first to promote his films as having artistic merit beyond entertainment. Hitchcock was one of the first directors to whom they applied their auteur theory, which stresses the artistic authority of the director in the film making process.
Through his fame, public persona, and degree of creative control, Hitchcock transformed the role of the director, which had previously been eclipsed by that of the producer. He is seen today as the quintessential director who managed to combine art and entertainment in a way very few have ever matched. His innovations and vision have influenced a great number of filmmakers, producers, and actors.
Biography
! The following is okay, with more biographical material, some trimming of minor films, and less of a "laundry list" exposition
Early life
Alfred Hitchcock was born on August 13, 1899, in Leytonstone, London, the second son and youngest of the three children of William Hitchcock, a greengrocer, and his wife, Emma Jane Hitchcock (nee Whelan). His family was mostly Irish Catholic. Hitchcock was sent to Catholic boarding schools in London. He has said his childhood was very lonely and sheltered.
At an early age, after acting childishly, Hitchcock claimed that his father sent him to the local police station carrying a note. When he presented the police officer on duty with the note, he was locked in a cell for a few moments, petrifying the young child. This was a favorite anecdote of his, one which is often suggested to be the cause for the theme of distrust of police which runs through many of his films.
At 14, Hitchcock lost his father and left the Jesuit run St Ignatius' College in Stamford Hill, his school at the time, to study at the School for Engineering and Navigation. After graduating, he became a draftsman and advertising designer with a cable company.
About that time, Hitchcock became intrigued by photography and started working in film in London. In 1920, he obtained a full time job at Islington Studios under its American owners, Players Lasky, and their British successors, Gainsborough Pictures, designing the titles for silent movies.
Pre war British career
As a major talent in a new industry with plenty of opportunity, he rose quickly. In 1925, Michael Balcon of Gainsborough Pictures gave him a chance to direct his first film, ''The Pleasure Garden'', made at the Ufa studios in Germany. However, the commercial failure of this film, and his second, ''The Mountain Eagle'', threatened to derail his promising career, until he attached himself to the thriller genre. The resulting film, ''The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog'', was released in 1927 and was a major commercial and critical success. Like many of his earlier works it was influenced by Expressionist techniques he had witnessed first hand in Germany. In it, attractive blondes are strangled and the new lodger (Ivor Novello) in the Bunting family's upstairs apartment falls under heavy suspicion. This is the first truly "Hitchcockian" film, incorporating such themes as the "wrong man".
Following the success of ''The Lodger'', Hitchcock began his first efforts to promote himself in the media, and hired a publicist to cement his growing reputation as one of the British film industry's rising stars. In 1926, he was to marry his assistant director Alma Reville. They had a daughter, Patricia, in 1928. Alma was Hitchcock's closest collaborator. She wrote some of his screenplays and worked with him on every one of his films.
In 1929, he began work on ''Blackmail'', his tenth film. While the film was in production, the studio decided to make it one of Britain's first sound pictures. With the climax of the film taking place on the dome of the British Museum, ''Blackmail'' also began the Hitchcock tradition of using famous landmarks as the backdrop to a story.
In 1933, Hitchcock was once again working for Michael Balcon at Gaumont British Picture Corporation. His first film for the company, ''The Man Who Knew Too Much'' (1934), was a success, while his second, '' The 39 Steps'' (1935), is often considered one of the best films from his early period. It was also one of the first to introduce the concept of the "MacGuffin", a plot device around which a whole story would revolve. In ''The 39 Steps'', the MacGuffin is a stolen set of blueprints.
His next major success was in 1938, ''The Lady Vanishes'', a clever and fast paced film about the search for a kindly old Englishwoman (Dame May Whitty), who disappears while on board a train in the fictional country of Vandrika (a thinly veiled version of Nazi Germany).
By the end of the 1930s, Hitchcock was at the top of his game artistically, and in a position to name his own terms when David O. Selznick managed to entice the Hitchcocks across to Hollywood.
Hollywood
Hitchcock's ''gallows humour'' continued in his American work, together with the suspense that became his trademark. However, working arrangements with his new producer were less than optimal. Selznick suffered from perennial money problems and Hitchcock was often unhappy with the amount of creative control demanded by Selznick over his films. Subsequently, Selznick ended up "loaning" Hitchcock to the larger studios more often than producing Hitchcock's films himself.
With the prestigious picture ''Rebecca'' in 1940, Hitchcock made his first American movie, although it was set in England and based on a novel by English author Dame Daphne du Maurier. This Gothic melodrama explores the fears of a na ve young bride who enters a great English country home and must grapple with a distant husband, a predatory housekeeper, and the legacy of her husband's late wife. It has also subsequently been noted for the lesbian undercurrents in Judith Anderson's performance. The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940. Hitchcock's second American film, the European set thriller ''Foreign Correspondent'' was also nominated for Best Picture that year.
Hitchcock's work during the 1940's was very diverse, ranging from the romantic comedy, ''Mr. Mrs. Smith'' (1941) and the courtroom drama ''The Paradine Case'' (1947), to the dark and disturbing ''Shadow of a Doubt'' (1943).
''Shadow of a Doubt'', his personal favorite, was about young Charlotte "Charlie" Newton (Teresa Wright), who suspects her beloved uncle Charlie Spencer (Joseph Cotten) of murder. In its use of overlapping characters, dialogue, and closeups it has provided a generation of film theorists with psychoanalytic potential, including Jacques Lacan and Slavoj i ek. The film also harkens to one of Cotten's better known films, ''Citizen Kane''.
''Spellbound'' explored the then very fashionable subject of psychoanalysis and featured a dream sequence which was designed by Salvador Dali. The actual dream sequence in the film was considerably cut from the original planned scene that was to run for some minutes but proved too disturbing for the finished film.
''Notorious'' (1946) marked Hitchcock's first film as a producer as well as director. As Selznick failed to see the subject's potential, he allowed Hitchcock to make the film for RKO. From this point on, Hitchcock would produce his own films, giving him a far greater degree of freedom to pursue the projects that interested him. Starring Ingrid Bergman and Hitchcock regular Cary Grant, and featuring a plot about Nazis, uranium, and South America, ''Notorious'' was a huge box office success and has remained one of Hitchcock's most acclaimed films. Its inventive use of suspense and props briefly led to Hitchcock being under surveillance by the CIA due to his use of uranium as a plot device.
''Rope'' (his first color film) came next in 1948. Here Hitchcock experimented with marshalling suspense in a confined environment, as he had done earlier with ''Lifeboat''. He also experimented with exceptionally long takes up to ten minutes (see Themes and devices). Featuring James Stewart in the leading role, ''Rope'' was the first of an eventual four films Stewart would make for Hitchcock. Based on the Leopold and Loeb case of the 1920s, ''Rope'' is also among the earliest openly gay themed films to emerge from the Hays Office controlled Hollywood studio era.
''Under Capricorn'', set in nineteenth century Australia, also used this short lived technique, but to a more limited extent. For these two films he formed a production company with Sidney Bernstein, called Transatlantic Pictures, which folded after these two unsuccessful pictures.
Peak years and decline
With ''Strangers on a Train'' (1951), his first epic film based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith, Hitchcock combined many of the best elements from his preceding British and American films. Two men casually meet and speculate on removing people who are causing them difficulty. One of the men, though, takes this banter entirely seriously. With Farley Granger reprising some elements of his role from ''Rope'', ''Strangers'' continued the director's interest in the narrative possiblities of homosexual blackmail and murder.
Three very popular films, all starring Grace Kelly, followed. ''Dial M for Murder'' was adapted from the popular stage play by Frederick Knott. This was originally another experimental film, with Hitchcock using the technique of 3D cinematography, although the film was never released in this format. ''Rear Window'', starred James Stewart again, as well as Thelma Ritter and Raymond Burr. Here the wheelchair bound Stewart observes the movements of his neighbours across the courtyard and becomes convinced one of them has murdered his wife. Like ''Lifeboat'' and ''Rope'', the movie was photographed almost entirely within the confines of a small space: Stewart's tiny studio apartment overlooking the massive courtyard set. ''To Catch a Thief'', set in the French Riviera, starred Kelly and Cary Grant.
In 1956, Hitchcock also remade his 1934 film ''The Man Who Knew Too Much'', this time with James Stewart and Doris Day.
1958's ''Vertigo'' again starred Stewart, this time with Kim Novak and Barbara Bel Geddes. The film was a commercial failure, but has come to be viewed by many as one of Hitchcock's masterpieces.
Hitchcock followed ''Vertigo'' with three very different films, which were all massive commercial successes. All are also recognised as among his very best films: ''North by Northwest'' (1959), ''Psycho'' (1960), and ''The Birds'' (1963). The latter two were particularly notable for their unconventional soundtracks, both by Bernard Herrmann: the screeching strings in the murder scene in ''Psycho'' pushed the limits of the time, and ''The Birds'' dispensed completely with conventional instruments, using an electronically produced soundtrack. These were his last great films, after which his career slowly wound down. In 1972 Hitchcock returned to London to film ''Frenzy'', his last major success. For the first time, Hitchcock allowed nudity and profane language, which had before been taboo, in one of his films.
Failing health slowed down his output over the last two decades of his life.
''Family Plot'' (1976) was his last film. It related the escapades of "Madam" Blanche Tyler played by Barbara Harris, a fraudulent spiritualist, and her taxi driver lover Bruce Dern making a living from her phony powers. William Devane and Katherine Helmond co starred.
Hitchcock was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II in the 1980 New Years Honours. He died just four months later, on April 29, before he had the opportunity to be formally invested by the Queen. He was nevertheless entitled to be known as '''Sir Alfred Hitchcock''' and to use the postnominal letters KBE, because he remained a British subject when he adopted American citizenship in 1956.
Alfred Hitchcock died from renal failure in his Bel Air, Los Angeles, home aged 80, and was survived by his wife Alma Reville, and their daughter, Patricia Hitchcock O'Connell. His body was cremated, and apparently there was no public funeral or memorial service.
Themes and devices
Hitchcock preferred the use of suspense over surprise in his films. In surprise, the director assaults the viewer with frightening things. In suspense, the director tells or shows things to the audience which the characters in the film do not know, and then artfully builds tension around what will happen when the characters finally learn the truth.
Further blurring the moral distinction between the innocent and the guilty, occasionally making this indictment clear, Hitchcock also makes voyeurs of his "respectable" audience. In ''Rear Window'' (1954), after L. B. Jeffries (played by James Stewart) has been staring across the courtyard at him for most of the film, Lars Thorwald (played by Raymond Burr) confronts Jeffries by saying "What do you want of me?" Burr might as well have been addressing the audience. In fact, shortly before asking this, Thorwald turns to face the camera directly for the first time at this point, audiences often gasp.
One of Hitchcock's favourite devices for driving the plots of his stories and creating suspense was what he called the "MacGuffin." The plots of many of his suspense films revolve around a "MacGuffin": a detail which, by inciting curiosity and desire, drives the plot and motivates the actions of characters within the story, but whose specific identity and nature is unimportant to the spectator of the film. In ''Vertigo'', for instance, "Carlotta Valdes" is a MacGuffin she never appears and the details of her death are unimportant to the viewer, but the story about her ghost's haunting of Madeleine Elster is the spur for Scottie's investigation of her, and hence the film's entire plot. In ''Notorious'' the uranium that the main characters must recover before it reaches Nazi hands serves as a similarly arbitrary motivation: any dangerous object would suffice. And state secrets of various kinds serve as MacGuffins in several of the spy films, like '' The 39 Steps''.
Most of Hitchcock's films contain cameo appearances by Hitchcock himself: the director would be seen for a brief moment boarding a bus, crossing in front of a building, standing in an apartment across the courtyard, or appearing in a photograph. This playful gesture became one of Hitchcock's signatures. As a recurring theme he would carry a musical instrument especially memorable was the large double bass case that he wrestles onto the train at the beginning of ''Strangers on a Train''.
In his earliest appearances he would fill in as an obscure extra, standing in a crowd or walking through a scene in a long camera shot. But he became more prominent in his later appearances, as when he turns to see Jane Wyman's disguise when she passes him on the street in ''Stage Fright'', and in stark silhouette in his final film ''Family Plot''. In another amusing cameo, albeit just a photograph, Hitchcock's picture is seen in the "before"
side of a newspaper weight loss ad in ''Lifeboat''. (See a list of Hitchcock cameo appearances.)
Hitchcock includes the consumption of brandy in nearly every sound film. "I'll get you some brandy. Drink this down. Just like medicine ..." says James Stewart's character to Kim Novak, in ''Vertigo.'' In a real life incident, Hitchcock dared Montgomery Clift at a dinner party around the filming of ''I Confess'' to swallow a carafe of brandy, which caused his lead actor to pass out, almost immediately. This near obsession with brandy remains unexplained.
Another almost inexplicable feature of any Hitchcock film is the inclusion of a staircase. Of course, stairways inspire many suspenseful moments, most notably Farley Granger's character visit to the murderer in ''Strangers On A Train'' or the detective's demise in the Bates' mansion in ''Psycho.'' However, a completely nonfunctional staircase adorns the apartment of the James Stewart character in ''Rear Window'', as if Hitchcock feels compelled to its inclusion by some unspoken superstition.
Hitchcock seemed to delight in the technical challenges of filmmaking. In ''Lifeboat'', Hitchcock sets the entire action of the movie in a small boat, yet manages to keep the cinematography from monotonous repetition. His trademark cameo appearance was a dilemma, given the claustrophobic setting so Hitchcock appeared on camera in a fictitious newspaper ad for a weight loss product.
In ''Spellbound'' two unprecedented point of view shots were achieved by constructing a large wooden hand (which would appear to belong to the character whose point of view the camera took) and outsized props for it to hold: a bucket sized glass of milk and a large wooden gun. For added novelty and impact, the climactic gunshot was hand colored red on some copies of the black and white print of the film.
''Rope'' (1948) was another technical challenge: a film that appears to have been shot entirely in a single take. The film was actually shot in eight takes of approximately 10 minutes each, which was the amount of film that would fit in a single camera reel the transitions between reels were hidden by having a dark object fill the entire screen for a moment. Hitchcock used those points to hide the cut, and began the next take with the camera in the same place.
His 1958 film ''Vertigo'' contains a camera trick that has been imitated and re used so many times by filmmakers, it has become known as the Hitchcock zoom.
Although famous for inventive camera angles, Hitchcock generally avoided points of view that were physically impossible from a human perspective. For example, he would never place the camera looking out from inside a refrigerator.
Regarding Hitchcock's sometimes less than pleasant relationship with actors, there was a persistent rumor that he had said that actors were cattle. Hitchcock later denied this, typically tongue in cheek, clarifying that he had only said that actors should be treated like cattle. Carole Lombard, tweaking Hitchcock and drumming up a little publicity, brought some cows along with her when she reported to the set of ''Mr. and Mrs. Smith''.
Hitchcock often dealt with matters that he felt were sexually preverse or kinky, and many of his films darring subverted the restrictive Hollywood Production Code that prohibited any mention of homosexuality.
His character and its effects on his films
Hitchcock's films sometimes feature male characters struggling in their relationships with their mothers. In ''North by Northwest'' (1959), Roger Thornhill (Cary Grant's character) is an innocent man ridiculed by his mother for insisting that shadowy, murderous men are after him (in this case, they are). In ''The Birds'' (1963), the Rod Taylor character, an innocent man, finds his world under attack by vicious birds, and struggles to free himself of a clinging mother (Jessica Tandy). The killer in ''Frenzy'' (1972) has a loathing of women but idolizes his mother. The villain Bruno in ''Strangers on a Train'' hates his father, but has an incredibly close relationship with his mother (played by Marion Lorne). Norman Bates' troubles with his mother in ''Psycho'' are infamous.
Hitchcock heroines tend to be lovely, cool blondes who seem at first to be proper but, when aroused by passion or danger, respond in a more sensual, animal, perhaps criminal way. As noted, the famous victims in ''The Lodger'' are all blondes. In '' The 39 Steps'', Hitchcock's glamorous blonde star, Madeleine Carroll, is put in handcuffs. In ''Marnie'' (1964), glamorous blonde Tippi Hedren is a kleptomaniac. In ''To Catch a Thief'' (1955), glamorous blonde Grace Kelly offers to help someone she believes is a cat burglar. After becoming interested in Thorwald's life in ''Rear Window'', Lisa breaks into Thorwald's apartment. And, most notoriously, in ''Psycho'', Janet Leigh's character steals 40,000 and gets murdered by a young man named Norman Bates (played by Anthony Perkins) who thought he was his own mother. His last blonde heroine was French actress Claude Jade as the secret agent's worried daughter, Michele, in '''Topaz''' (1969).
Hitchcock saw that reliance on actors and actresses was a holdover from the theater tradition. He was a pioneer in using camera movement, camera set ups and montage to explore the outer reaches of cinematic art.
Most critics and Hitchcock scholars, including Donald Spoto and Roger Ebert, agree that ''Vertigo'' is probably the director's most personal and revealing film, dealing with the obsessions of a man who crafts a woman into the woman he desires. ''Vertigo'' explores more frankly and at greater length his interest in the relation between sex and death than any other film in his filmography.
Hitchcock often said that his personal favourite was ''Shadow of a Doubt''.
His style of working
Hitchcock once commented, "The writer and I plan out the entire script down to the smallest detail, and when we're finished all that's left to do is to shoot the film. Actually, it's only when one enters the studio that one enters the area of compromise. Really, the novelist has the best casting since he doesn't have to cope with the actors and all the rest." Hitchcock was often critical of his actors and actresses as well, dismissing, for example, Kim Novak's performance in ''Vertigo'', and once famously remarking that actors were to be treated like cattle. (In response to being accused of saying 'actors are cattle', he said 'I never said they were cattle I said they were to be ''treated'' like cattle'.)
The first book devoted to the director is simply named ''Hitchcock''. It is a document of a one week interview by Fran ois Truffaut in 1967. (ISBN 0671604295)
Awards
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awarded Hitchcock the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award, in 1967. However, despite six earlier nominations, he never won an Oscar in a contested category. His unsuccessful Oscar nominations were:
for Best Director: ''Rebecca'' (1940), ''Lifeboat'' (1944), ''Spellbound'' (1945), ''Rear Window'', and ''Psycho'' and
as a producer, for Best Picture: ''Suspicion'' (1941).
However ''Rebecca'', which Hitchcock did direct, won the 1940 Best Picture Oscar for its producer David O. Selznick. Three other films Hitchcock directed were unsuccessfully nominated for Best Picture.
Hitchcock was knighted in 1980.
Other notes
From 1955 to 1965, Hitchcock was the host and producer of a long running television series entitled ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents''. While his films had made Hitchcock's name strongly associated with suspense, the TV series made Hitchcock a celebrity himself. His irony tinged voice, image, and mannerisms became instantly recognizable and were often the subject of parody. He directed a few episodes of the TV series himself and he upset a number of movie production companies when he insisted on using his TV production crew to produce his motion picture ''Psycho''. In the late 1980s, a new version of ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'' was produced for television, making use of Hitchcock's original introductions.
Alfred Hitchcock is also immortalised in print and appeared as himself in the very popular juvenile detective series, ''Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators''. The long running detective series was clever and well written, with characters much younger than the Hardy Boys. In ghost written introductions, "Alfred Hitchcock" formerly introduced each case at the beginning of the book, often giving them new cases to solve. At the end of each book, Alfred Hitchcock would discuss the specifics of the case with Jupiter Jones, Bob Andrews and Peter Crenshaw and every so often the three boys would give Alfred Hitchcock mementos of their case.
When Alfred Hitchcock passed away, his chores as the boys' mentor friend would be done by a fictional character: a retired detective named Hector Sebastian. Due to the popularity of the series, ''Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators'' scored several reprints and out of respect, the latter reprints were changed to just ''The Three Investigators''. Over the years, more than one name has been used to replace Alfred Hitchcock's character, especially for the earlier books when his role was emphasised.
At the height of Hitchcock's success, he was also asked to introduce a set of books with his name attached. The series was a collection of short stories by popular short story writers, primarily focused on suspense and thrillers. These titles included ''Alfred Hitchcock's Monster Museum'', ''Alfred Hithcock's Supernatural Tales of Terror and Suspense'', ''Alfred Hitchcock's Spellbinders in Suspense'', ''Alfred Hitchcock's Witch's Brew'', ''Alfred Hitchcock's Ghostly Gallery'' and ''Alfred Hitchcock's Haunted Houseful.'' Hitchcock himself was not actually involved in the reading, reviewing, editing or selection of the short stories in fact, even his introductions were ghost written. The entire extent of his involvement with the project was to lend his name and collect a check.
Some notable writers whose works were used in the collection include Shirley Jackson (''Strangers in Town'', ''The Lottery''), T.H. White (''The Sword in the Stone''), Robert Bloch, H. G. Wells (''The War of the Worlds''), Robert Louis Stevenson, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Mark Twain and the creator of ''The Three Investigators'', Robert Arthur.
Filmography
(all dates are for release)
Silent films
No. 13 (Unfinished, also known as ''Mrs. Peabody'') (1922)
Always Tell Your Wife (Uncredited) (1923)
''The Pleasure Garden'' (1925)
''The Mountain Eagle'' (1926)
''The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog'' (1927)
''Downhill'' (1927)
''Easy Virtue'' (1928), based on a Noel Coward play
''The Ring'' (1927), an original story by Hitchcock.
''The Farmer's Wife'' (1928)
''Champagne'' (1928)
''The Manxman'' (1929)
''Blackmail'' (1929), silent version of the more famous talkie
Sound films
''Blackmail'' (1929), the first British talkie
''Juno and the Paycock'' (1930)
''Murder!'' (1930)
''Elstree Calling'' (1930), made jointly with Adrian Brunel, Andre Charlot, Jack Hulbert and Paul Murray
''The Skin Game'' (1931)
''Mary'' (1931)
''Number Seventeen'' (1932)
''Rich and Strange'' (1932)
''Waltzes from Vienna'' (1933)
''The Man Who Knew Too Much'' (1934)
'' The 39 Steps'' (1935), with Robert Donat
''Secret Agent'' (1936), loosely based on Somerset Maugham's "Ashenden" stories
''Sabotage'' (aka "A woman alone") (1936), adapted from Joseph Conrad's ''The Secret Agent''
''Young and Innocent'' (1937)
''The Lady Vanishes'' (1938), with Michael Redgrave
''Jamaica Inn'' (1939), starring Charles Laughton
''Rebecca'' (1940), his only film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture
''Foreign Correspondent'' (1940)
''Mr. Mrs. Smith'' (1941), written by Norman Krasna
''Suspicion'' (1941)
''Saboteur'' (1942), often seen as a dry run for ''North by Northwest''
''Shadow of a Doubt'' (1943)
''Lifeboat'' (1944), Tallulah Bankhead's most famous film role
''Aventure Malgache'' (1944), a French language short made for the British Ministry of Information
''Bon Voyage'' (1944), another French language propaganda short
''Spellbound'' (1945), includes dream sequences designed by Salvador Dali
''Notorious'' (1946)
''The Paradine Case'' (1947)
''Rope'' (1948)
''Under Capricorn'' (1949)
''Stage Fright'' (1950), his first film in Britain since 1939
''Strangers on a Train'' (1951)
''I Confess'' (1953)
''Dial M for Murder'' (1954)
''Rear Window'' (1954)
''To Catch a Thief'' (1955)
''The Trouble with Harry'' (1955)
''The Man Who Knew Too Much'' (1956), remake of his 1934 film
''The Wrong Man'' (1956)
''Vertigo'' (1958)
''North by Northwest'' (1959)
''Psycho'' (1960)
''The Birds'' (1963)
''Marnie'' (1964)
''Torn Curtain '' (1966)
''Topaz'' (1969)
''Frenzy'' (1972)
''Family Plot'' (1976)
Television episodes
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Revenge" (1955)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Breakdown" (1955)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "The Case of Mr. Pelham" (1955)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Back for Christmas" (1956)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Wet Saturday" (1956)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Mr. Blanchard's Secret" (1956)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "One More Mile to Go" (1957)
''Suspicion'': "Four O'Clock" (1957)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "The Perfect Crime" (1957)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Lamb to the Slaughter" (1958)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Dip in the Pool" (1958)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Poison" (1958)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Banquo's Chair" (1959)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Arthur" (1959)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "The Crystal Trench" (1959)
''Ford Startime'': "Incident at a Corner" (1960)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Mrs. Bixby and the Colonel's Coat" (1960)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "The Horseplayer" (1961)
''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'': "Bang! You're Dead" (1961)
''The Alfred Hitchcock Hour'': "I Saw the Whole Thing" (1962)
Frequent collaborators
! This needs to be fleshed out. A simple laundry list does no justice.
Sara Allgood,
Charles Bennett (screenwriter),
Ingrid Bergman,
Carl Brisson,
Robert Burks (cinematographer),
Madeleine Carroll,
Leo G. Carroll,
Joseph Cotten,
Hume Cronyn,
Robert Cummings,
Joan Fontaine,
John Forsythe,
Farley Granger,
Cary Grant,
Clare Greet,
Lilian Hall Davis,
Gordon Harker,
Ben Hecht (writer),
Tippi Hedren,
Bernard Herrmann (composer),
Hannah Jones,
Malcolm Keen,
Grace Kelly,
Charles Laughton,
John Longden,
Peter Lorre,
Miles Mander,
Vera Miles,
Ivor Novello,
Anny Ondra,
Gregory Peck,
Jessie Royce Landis,
James Stewart,
John Williams
See also
Unproduced Hitchcock Projects
Further reading
Truffaut, Fran ois: ''Hitchcock''. Simon and Schuster, 1985. A series of interviews of Hitchcock by the influential French director. This is an important source, but some have criticised Truffaut for taking an uncritical stance.
Leitch, Thomas: ''The Encyclopedia of Alfred Hitchcock''. Checkmark Books, 2002. An excellent single volume encyclopedia of all things Hitchcock.
DeRosa, Steven: ''Writing with Hitchcock''. Faber and Faber, 2001. An examination of the collaboration between Hitchcock and screenwriter John Michael Hayes, his most frequent writing collaborator in Hollywood. Their films include ''Rear Window'' and ''The Man Who Knew Too Much''.
Deutelbaum, Marshall Poague, Leland (ed.): ''A Hitchcock Reader''. Iowa State University Press, 1986. A wide ranging collection of scholarly essays on Hitchcock.
Spoto, Donald: ''The Art of Alfred Hitchcock''. Anchor Books, 1992. The first detailed critical survey of Hitchcock's work by an American.
Spoto, Donald: ''The Dark Side of Genius''. Ballantine Books, 1983. A biography of Hitchcock, featuring a controversial exploration of Hitchcock's psychology.
Gottlieb, Sidney: ''Alfred Hitchcock: Interviews''. University Press of Mississippi, 2003. A collection of Hitchcock interviews.
Conrad, Peter: ''The Hitchcock Murders''. Faber and Faber, 2000. A highly personal and idiosyncratic discussion of Hitchcock's oeuvre.
Rebello, Stephen: ''Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho''. St. Martin's, 1990. Intimately researched and detailed history of the making of ''Psycho,'' praised as one of the best books on moviemaking ever. ! Doesn't this properly belong at the Psycho article, not here?
McGilligan, Patrick: ''Alfred Hitchcock: A Life in Darkness and Light''. Regan Books, 2003. A comprehensive biography of the director.
Modleski, Tania: ''The Women Who Knew Too Much: Hitchcock And Feminist Theory''. Routledge, 2005 (2nd edition). A collection of critical essays on Hitchcock and his films, argues that Hitchcock's portrayal of women was an ambivalent one, not misogynist nor sympathetic (as widely thought). An important text to consider, given the abundance of female heroes and victims in his films.
Wood, Robin: ''Hitchcock's Films Revisited''. Columbia University Press, 2002 (2nd edition). Another collection of critical essays, now revisited by the author in this 2nd edition to supplement and annotate the highly lauded entries from before with the additional insight and changes that time and personal experience has brought him (including his own coming out as a gay man).
External links
online exhibit from screenonline, a website of the British Film Institute
the online extension of the Alfred Hitchcock journal ''The MacGuffin''
Companion site to Steven DeRosa's book of the same name, includes original interviews, essays, script excerpts, and extensive material on Hitchcock's unproduced works.
details of Hitchcock DVD releases from around the world
Watch the movie online for free
A checklist of his top 13 film techniques.
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Sir Alfred
Hitchcock, Alfred
ilo:Alfred Hitchcock
bg:
bs:Alfred Hitchcock
ca:Alfred Hitchcock
cs:Alfred Hitchcock
cy:Alfred Hitchcock
da:Alfred Hitchcock
de:Alfred Hitchcock
et:Alfred Hitchcock
es:Alfred Hitchcock
eo:Alfred HITCHCOCK
fa:
fr:Alfred Hitchcock
ko:
hr:Alfred Hitchcock
io:Alfred Hitchcock
id:Alfred Hitchcock
is:Alfred Hitchcock
it:Alfred Hitchcock
he: '
lb:Alfred Hitchcock
hu:Alfred Hitchcock
nl:Alfred Hitchcock
ja:
no:Alfred Hitchcock
pl:Alfred Hitchcock
pt:Alfred Hitchcock
ro:Alfred Hitchcock
ru: ,
sq:Alfred Hitchcock
sh:Alfred Hitchcock
simple:Alfred Hitchcock
sk:Alfred Hitchcock
sl:Alfred Hitchcock
sr:
fi:Alfred Hitchcock
sv:Alfred Hitchcock
th:
vi:Alfred Hitchcock
tr:Alfred Hitchcock
zh:
Taxobox
color pink
name Anacondas
image Eunectes notaeus.jpg
image width 240px
image caption Yellow Anaconda, ''Eunectes notaeus''
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis Reptilia
ordo Squamata
subordo Serpentes
familia Boidae
genus '''''Eunectes'''''
genus authority Wagler, 1830
subdivision ranks Species
subdivision
See text.
'''Anacondas''' (Jib ia and Sucuri, local names) are three species of aquatic boa inhabiting the swamps and rivers of the dense forests of tropical South America as well as the southern swamps of the island of Trinidad .
There are two possible origins for the word 'anaconda': It is perhaps an alteration of the Sinhalese word 'henakanday', meaning 'whip snake', or more likely, the Tamil word 'anaikolra', which means 'elephant killer', as early Spanish settlers in South America referred to the anaconda as 'matatoro', or 'bull killer'. It is unclear how the name originated so far from the snake's native habitat, it is likely due to its vague similarity to the large Asian pythons.sup sup
Two species are well known:
The '''Green Anaconda''' (''Eunectes murinus''), which has been reported at over 10 meters (32.8 feet) in length (although most are considerably smaller). Although shorter than the longest recorded species, the Reticulated Python, it is considerably heavier. In fact, it is the heaviest snake species in existence. It can weigh 250 kg (551 pounds) and have a girth of more than 30 cm (11.8 inches) in diameter. Females are larger than males, averaging 22 26 feet and 12 16 feet respectively. These are found mainly in northern South America, in Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, northern Bolivia, northeast Peru, Guyana, and Trinidad. Although charismatic, very little information was known about the anacondas until 1992 when the first study (and so far the only) was made on the field biology of this species in the Venezuelan llanos by Dr. Jesus Rivas. sup sup
The '''Yellow Anaconda''' (''Eunectes notaeus''), which reaches a relatively smaller average adult length of 3 metres (9.8 feet). These live further south in Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay, western Brazil, and northeast Argentina.
The third lesser known species is:
The '''Dark Spotted''' or '''Deschauense's Anaconda''' (''Eunectes deschauenseei'') found in northeast Brazil.
''Eunectes murinus'' (formerly called ''Boa murina'') differs from Boa by the snout being covered with shields instead of small scales, the inner of the three nasal shields being in contact with that of the other side. The general colour is dark olive brown, with large oval black spots arranged in two alternating rows along the back, and with smaller white eyed spots along the sides. The belly is whitish, spotted with black spots. The anaconda combines an arboreal with an aquatic life, and feeds chiefly upon birds, mammals and caiman, mostly during the night. It lies submerged in the water, with only a small part of its head above the surface, waiting for any suitable prey, or it establishes itself upon the branches of a tree which overhangs the water or the track of game.
Like almost all boas, anacondas give birth to live young.
Giant Anacondas
The largest known anacondas measure about 10.6 meters (30.7 feet) long, but unverified reports of much larger snakes have occasionally been made.
One notable account was reported by adventurer Percy Fawcett. In 1906, Fawcett wrote that he had shot and wounded an anaconda in South America he reported the snake measured some 18.9 meters (62 feet) from nose to tail.
Once publicized, Fawcett s account of the giant snake was widely ridiculed, although he insisted his account was both truthful and accurate. Bernard Heuvelmans came to his defense arguing that Fawcett was generally honest and reliable when relating things. Furthermore, Heuvelmans noted that mainstream experts were repeatedly forced to revise their limits regarding the maximum size of snakes when confronted with specimens that defied the generally accepted estimates. At one point in time, 6 meters (20 feet) in length was the widely accepted maximum size of an anaconda. These giant snakes are very capable of killing and consuming an adult human being.
When it sheds, an adult anaconda relieves itself of an average of 2 pounds of skin. An anaconda's skin can stretch up to 30 larger than the original size of the snake.
In captivity
Anacondas have a reputation for bad temperament that plus the massive size of the green species mean that anacondas are comparatively less popular as pets than other boas, but they are fairly commonly available in the exotic pet trade, with the exception of ''E. deschauenseei''.
References
Bernard Heuvelmans, ''On The Track Of Unknown Animals'', Hill and Wang, 1958
External links
Category:Boas
Category:Fauna of Brazil
Category:Fauna of the Amazon
Category:Wildlife of South America
Category:Fauna of Trinidad and Tobago
ar:
da:Anakonda
de:Anakondas
es:Eunectes
fa:
ko:
he:
lt:Anakonda
nl:Anaconda
ja:
no:Anakonda
pl:Anakonda
pt:Anaconda
fi:Anakonda
sv:Anakonda
uk:
:''This article is about the Christian holiday. For other meanings see All Saints (disambiguation) and All Hallows (disambiguation)''
The festival of '''All Saints''', also sometimes known as "All Hallows," or "Hallowmas," is a feast celebrated in their honour. '''All Saints''' is also a Christian formula invoking all the faithful saints and martyrs, known or unknown.
The Roman Catholic holiday (''Festum omnium sanctorum'') falls on November 1, followed by All Souls Day on November 2, and is a Holy Day of Obligation, with a vigil and an octave. The Eastern Orthodox Church's '''All Saints''' is the first Sunday after Pentecost and as such marks the close of the Easter season.
Common commemorations by several churches of the deaths of martyrs began to be celebrated in the 4th century. The first trace of a general celebration is attested in Antioch on the Sunday after Pentecost. This custom is also referred to in the 74th homily of John Chrysostom (407) and is maintained to the present day in the Eastern Orthodox Church.
The date of festival was changed to November 1 by Pope Gregory III (731741) to coincide with the ancient Celtic New Year's festival Samhain. He designated November 1 as the date of the anniversary of the consecration of a chapel in St. Peter's for the relics "of the holy apostles and of all saints, martyrs and confessors, of all the just made perfect who are at rest throughout the world". By the time of the reign of Charlemagne, the November festival of All Saints was widely celebrated. November 1 was decreed a day of obligation by the Frankish king Louis the Pious in 835 issued "at the instance of Pope Gregory IV and with the assent of all the bishops."
In Portugal, Spain and Mexico, ''ofrendas'' (offerings) are made on this day. In Spain, the play Don Juan Tenorio is traditionally performed. In Portugal and France, people offer flowers to dead relatives. In Poland and Germany, the tradition is to light candles and visit the graves of deceased relatives. In the Philippines, the day is spent visiting the graves of deceased relatives, where they offer prayers, lay flowers, and light candles, often in a picnic like atmosphere. In English speaking countries, the festival is celebrated with the hymn "For All the Saints", set to music by Ralph Vaughan Williams.
The festival was retained after the Reformation in the calendar of the Church of England and in many Lutheran churches. In the Lutheran churches, such as the Church of Sweden, it assumes a role of general commemoration of the dead (similar to the ''All Souls'' commemoration in the Eastern Orthodox Church that takes place two Saturdays before the beginning of Lent). In the Swedish calendar, the observance takes place on the first Saturday of November. In many Lutheran Churches however, the festival has fallen into disuse.
See also
Veneration of the dead
Halloween
Dziady
Day of the Dead
Compare
Saturnalia and Yule
Reference
article in the Catholic Encyclopedia
! Categories
Category:Liturgical Calendar
All Saints
! Interwiki links
External links
cs:V ech svat ch
da:Allehelgensdag
de:Allerheiligen
es:D a de Todos Los Santos
fr:Toussaint
is:Allraheilagramessa
la:Sollemnitas Omnium Sanctorum
nl:Allerheiligen
ja:
pl:Wszystkich wi tych
pt:Dia de Todos os Santos
sl:Dan spomina na mrtve
sv:Alla helgons dag
zh:
REDIRECT History of Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
REDIRECT Geography of Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
REDIRECT Economy of Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
REDIRECT Transportation in Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
REDIRECT Military of Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
REDIRECT Foreign relations of Afghanistan
:''See also :'' Afghanistan
'''Altaic''' is a proposed language family which includes 60 languages spoken by about 250 million people, mostly in and around Central Asia and the Far East. The relationships among these languages remain a matter of debate among historical linguists. Some scholars consider the obvious similarity between these languages as genetically inherited others propose the idea of the Sprachbund.
Its proponents traditionally considered it to include Korean, the Turkic languages, the Mongolic languages, the Tungusic languages (or Manchu Tungus), and Japanese. Ainu has occasionally been suggested as a member of Altaic, but that hypothesis is generally rejected. Castr n (1862) put forward a similar view, but classified Turkic with what we would now call Uralic. In 1857 Anton Boller suggested adding Korean and Japanese for Korean, G. J. Ramstedt and E. D. Polivanov put forward more etymologies in the 1920's. Korean has commonly been linked to Japonic, and in 1971, Roy Miller suggested relating it to both Korean and Altaic. These suggestions have been taken up and developed by various historical linguists such as John Whitman, Sergei Starostin, and Alexander Vovin (who now rejects a genetic connection between Korean and Japanese).
There have been some attempts to extend the Altaic family borders by including Ainu (e.g., Street 1962, Patrie 1982), Tamil, Nivkh, or Hungarian, but these proposals have been rejected by the majority of scholars.
Controversy
There are two main schools of thought about the Altaic theory. One is that the proposed constituent language families (Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic in the basic theory, with the addition of Korean and Japanese in extended versions) are genetically or "divergently" related by descent from a common ancestor, "Proto Altaic." The other school rejects this theory (so it is often called the "Anti Altaic" school) and argues that the member languages are related by convergence (mainly loan influence).
The Altaic theory is claimed by its opponents to be based mainly on typological similarities, such as vowel harmony, lack of grammatical gender, an agglutinative typology, and loanwords. In fact, its proponents have put together a large variety of grammatical, lexical, and syntactic regular correspondences between the sub groups of Altaic (e.g., Ramstedt, Poppe, Martin, Starostin). However, its opponents explain these as loanwords, mutual influence, or convergence, arguing that, although the Turkic, Mongolian, and Tungusic families do have similarities, they are the result of intensive borrowing and long contact among speakers.
The Altaic theory is highly controversial. While some support it, others (e.g., Doerfer 1963) do not regard Altaic as a valid group and see it as three (or more) separate language families. Other linguists, such as Bernard Comrie (1992, 2003), argue that Altaic may be part of a larger grouping, such as Nostratic or Eurasiatic. In contrast, J. Marshall Unger (1990) believes that languages such as Korean and Japanese may be part of a "macro Tungusic" family. Vovin rejected the claim for a Koreo Japonic branch of Altaic on the basis that they have no shared innovations.
See also
Altay language
Language families and languages
Nostratic
External links
Category:Altai
ar:
ast:Familia altaica
bg:
be:
de:Altaisprachen
es:Lenguas altaicas
fa:
fr:Langues alta ques
ko:
io:Altaika linguaro
id:Bahasa Altai
lt:Altajaus kalbos
hu:Alt ji nyelvcsal d
nl:Alta sche talen
ja:
pl:J zyki a tajskie
pt:L nguas altaicas
ro:Limbi altaice
ru:
sl:Altajski jeziki
fi:Altailaiset kielet
sv:Altaiska spr k
vi:H ng n ng Altai
uk:
zh:
'''Austrian German''' is any variety of the German language spoken in Austria. There is no unitary Austrian language, but a variety of High German dialects are spoken. Besides the Germanic languages discussed here, minority languages such as Slovenian, Croatian, and Hungarian are spoken in parts of the country.
Overview
Standard German, called ''"High German"'' (German: ''standardsprache'' (by philologists), generally (incorrectly) referred to as ''Hochdeutsch'') in Austria.
Vorarlbergerisch, spoken in Vorarlberg, is an Alemannic dialect similar to Swiss German.
All other dialects belong to the Austro Bavarian group, which is a common language throughout much of the country.
Subgroups
Ordinarily, the latter dialects are considered to belong either to the Central Austro Bavarian or Southern Austro Bavarian subgroups, with the latter encompassing the languages of the Tyrol, Carinthia, and Styria and the former including the dialects of Vienna, Upper Austria, and Lower Austria. The dialect spoken in Vorarlberg is more closely related to Swiss German than it is to other Austrian dialects, so Austrians from outside Vorarlberg normally cannot understand it.
Intercomprehensiblity and regional accents
While strong forms of the various dialects are not normally comprehensible to Northern Germans, there is virtually no communication barrier to speakers from Bavaria. The Central Austro Bavarian dialects are more intelligible to speakers of Standard German than the Southern Austro Bavarian dialects of Tirol. Viennese, the Austro Bavarian dialect of Vienna, is most frequently used in Germany for impersonations of the typical inhabitant of Austria. The people of Graz, the capital of Styria, speak yet another dialect which is not very Styrian and more easily understood by people from other parts of Austria than other Styrian dialects, for example from western Styria.
Simple words in the various dialects are very similar, but pronunciation is distinct for each and it is very easy for an Austrian after a few spoken words to judge which Austrian dialect someone speaks. However, if it goes into the dialects of the deeper valleys of Tyrol, sometimes even other Tyroleans are helpless to understand the dialect. Speakers from the different states of Austria can usually easily be distinguished from each other by their particular accents (probably more so than Bavarians), with those of Carinthia, Styria, Vienna, Upper Austria, and the Tyrol being very characteristic. Speakers from those regions, even those speaking Standard German, can usually be easily identified by their accent, even by an untrained listener.
Several of the dialects have been influenced by contact with non Germanic linguistic groups, such as the dialect of Carinthia, where in the past many speakers were bilingual with Slovenian, and the dialect of Vienna, which has been influenced by immigration during the Austro Hungarian period, particularly from what is today the Czech Republic.
Interestingly, the geographic borderlines between the different accents coincide strongly with the borders of the states and also with the border to Bavaria, with Bavarians having a markedly different rhythm of speech in spite of the similarities in the language as such.
Standard German in Austria
With German being a pluricentric language, Austrian dialects should not be confused with the variety of Standard German spoken by most Austrians, which is distinct from that of Germany or Switzerland. Distinctions in vocabulary persist, for example, in culinary terms, where communication with Germans is frequently difficult, and administrative and legal language, which is due to Austria's exclusion from the development of a German nation state in the late 19th century and its manifold particular traditions.
Austrians speaking Standard German can almost always be recognised by their accent, much more so than speakers from most regions of Germany.
When Austria became a member of the European Union, the Austrian variety of the German language (limited to 23 agricultural terms) was protected in the so called Protocol no. 10 regarding the use of specific Austrian terms of the German language in the framework of the European Union, which forms part of the Austrian EU accession treaty. Austrian German is the only variety of a pluricentric language recognised under international law EU primary law. All facts concerning Protocol no. 10 are documented in Markhardt, Heidemarie: Das sterreichische Deutsch im Rahmen der EU, Peter Lang, 2005.
Influence of popular culture
Dialects are receding in Austria as they are in some other areas of Europe, but it can safely be said that they are more persistent than in most of Germany. Dialects are frequently used in TV series or movies in situation where it is appropriate for the particular character and situation. A classic example of a strong form of Viennese working class dialect, for example, would be ''Ein echter Wiener geht nicht unter''. However, strong varieties of dialect are not used quite as much as, for example, in Switzerland. For example, educated people in Vienna usually speak a very slight form of dialect or simply Standard German, but with the characteristic Viennese accent and, where it exists, particular Austrian and Viennese vocabulary.
A good reference for the Austrian, Bavarian and other German dialects are the dialect ("Mundart") editions of Asterix and Obelix comic books which are available in Viennese (three editions with different dialects from inside Vienna) and at least one for the common Tyrolean dialect and one for a deep Styrian dialect.
See also
Austro Bavarian
Viennese German
Category:High Germanic languages
de:Sprachgebrauch in sterreich
it:Differenze tra tedesco e austriaco
lt:Austriacizmas
In mathematics, the '''axiom of choice''', or '''AC''', is an axiom of set theory. It was formulated in 1904 by Ernst Zermelo. While it was originally controversial, it is now used without embarrassment by most mathematicians. However, there are still schools of mathematical thought, primarily within set theory, that either reject the axiom of choice, or even investigate consequences of axioms inconsistent with AC.
Intuitively speaking, AC says that given a collection of bins, each containing at least one object, then exactly one object from each bin can be picked and gathered in another bin even if there are infinitely many bins, and there is no "rule" for which object to pick from each.
Statement
The axiom of choice states:
:Let ''X'' be a set of non empty sets. Then we can choose a member from each set in ''X''.
Stated more formally:
:Let ''X'' be a set of non empty sets. Then there exists a choice function ''f'' defined on ''X''. In other words, there exists a function ''f'' defined on ''X'', such that for each set ''s'' in ''X'', ''f''(''s'') is an element of ''s''.
Another formulation of the axiom of choice states:
:Given any set of mutually disjoint non empty sets, there exists at least one set that contains exactly one element in common with each of the non empty sets.
Usage
Until the late 19th century, the axiom of choice was often used implicitly. For example, after having established that the set ''X'' contains only non empty sets, a mathematician might have said "let ''F(s)'' be one of the members of ''s'' for all ''s'' in ''X''." In general, it is impossible to prove that ''F'' exists without the axiom of choice, but this seems to have gone unnoticed until Zermelo.
Not every situation requires the axiom of choice. For finite sets ''X'', the axiom of choice follows from the other axioms of set theory. In that case it is equivalent to saying that if we have several (a finite number of) boxes, each containing at least one item, then we can choose exactly one item from each box. Clearly we can do this: We start at the first box, choose an item go to the second box, choose an item and so on. There are only finitely many boxes, so eventually our choice procedure comes to an end. The result is an explicit choice function: a function that takes the first box to the first element we chose, the second box to the second element we chose, and so on. (A formal proof for all finite sets would use the principle of mathematical induction.)
For certain infinite sets ''X'', it is also possible to avoid the axiom of choice. For example, suppose that the elements of ''X'' are sets of natural numbers. Every nonempty set of natural numbers has a least element, so to specify our choice function we can simply say that it takes each set to the least element of that set. This gives us a definite choice of an element from each set and we can write down an explicit expression that tells us what value our choice function takes. Any time it is possible to specify such an explicit choice, the axiom of choice is unnecessary.
The difficulty appears when there is no natural choice of elements from each set. If we cannot make explicit choices, how do we know that our set exists? For example, suppose that ''X'' is the set of all non empty subsets of the real numbers. First we might try to proceed as if ''X'' were finite. If we try to choose an element from each set, then, because ''X'' is infinite, our choice procedure will never come to an end, and consequently, we will never be able to produce a choice function for all of ''X''. So that won't work. Next we might try the trick of specifying the least element from each set. But some subsets of the real numbers don't have least elements. For example, the open interval (0,1) does not have a least element: If ''x'' is in (0,1), then so is ''x'' 2, and ''x'' 2 is always strictly smaller than ''x''. So taking least elements doesn't work, either.
The reason that we are able to choose least elements from subsets of the natural numbers is the fact that the natural numbers are well ordered: Every subset of the natural numbers has a unique least element. Perhaps if we were clever we might say, "Even though the usual ordering of the real numbers does not work, it may be possible to find a different ordering of the real numbers which is a well ordering. Then our choice function can choose the least element of every set under our unusual ordering." The problem then becomes constructing such an ordering, and it turns out that every set can be well ordered if and only if the axiom of choice is true.
A proof requiring the axiom of choice is always nonconstructive: even if the proof produces an object then it is impossible to say exactly what that object is. Consequently, while the axiom of choice asserts that there is a well ordering of the real numbers, it does not give us an example of one. Yet the reason why we chose above to well order the real numbers was so that for each set in ''X'', we could explicitly choose an element of that set. If we cannot write down the well ordering we are using, then our choice is not very explicit. This is one of the reasons why some mathematicians dislike the axiom of choice. For example, constructivists posit that all existence proofs should be totally explicit it should be possible to construct anything that exists. They reject the axiom of choice because it asserts the existence of an object without telling what it is.
Independence of AC
By work of Kurt G del and Paul Cohen, the axiom of choice is logically independent of the other axioms of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory (ZF). This means that neither it nor its negation can be proven to be true in ZF. Consequently, assuming the axiom of choice, or its negation, will never lead to a contradiction that could not be obtained without that assumption.
So the decision whether or not it is appropriate to make use of the axiom of choice in a proof cannot be made by appeal to other axioms of set theory. The decision must be made on other grounds.
One argument given in favor of using the axiom of choice is that it is convenient to use it: using it cannot hurt (cannot result in contradiction) and makes it possible to prove some propositions that otherwise could not be proved.
The axiom of choice is not the only significant statement which is independent of ZF. For example, the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) is not only independent of ZF, but also independent of ZF plus the axiom of choice (ZFC). However, ZF plus GCH implies AC, making GCH a strictly stronger claim than AC, even though they are both independent of ZF.
One reason that some mathematicians dislike the axiom of choice is that it implies the existence of some bizarre counter intuitive objects. An example of this is the Banach Tarski paradox which says in effect that it is possible to "carve up" the 3 dimensional solid unit ball into finitely many pieces and, using only rotation and translation, reassemble the pieces into two balls each with the same volume as the original. Note that the proof, like all proofs involving the axiom of choice, is an existence proof only: it does not tell us how to carve up the unit sphere to make this happen, it simply tells us that it can be done.
On the other hand, the negation of the axiom of choice is also bizarre. For example, the statement that for any two sets ''S'' and ''T'', the cardinality of ''S'' is less than or equal to the cardinality of ''T'' or the cardinality of ''T'' is less than or equal to the cardinality of ''S'' is equivalent to the axiom of choice. Put differently, if the axiom of choice is false, then there are sets ''S'' and ''T'' of incomparable size: neither can be mapped in a one to one fashion onto a subset of the other.
A third possibility is to prove theorems using neither the axiom of choice nor its negation, a tactic preferred in constructive mathematics. Such statements will be true in any model of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory, regardless of the truth or falsity of the axiom of choice in that particular model. This renders any claim that relies on either the axiom of choice or its negation undecidable. For example, under such an assumption, the Banach Tarski paradox is neither true nor false: It is impossible to construct a decomposition of the unit ball which can be reassembled into two unit balls, and it is also impossible to prove that it can't be done. However, the Banach Tarski paradox can be rephrased as a statement about models of ZF by saying, "In any model of ZF in which AC is true, the Banach Tarski paradox is true." Similarly, all the statements listed below under Results requiring AC are undecidable in ZF, but since each is provable in any model of ZFC, there are models of ZF in which each statement is true.
Weaker forms of AC
There are several weaker statements which are not equivalent to the axiom of choice, but which are closely related. A simple one is the axiom of countable choice, which states that a choice function exists for any countable set ''X''. This usually suffices when trying to make statements about the real numbers, for example, because the rational numbers, which are countable, form a dense subset of the reals. See also the Boolean prime ideal theorem, the ultrafilter lemma, the axiom of dependent choice, and the axiom of uniformization.
Results requiring AC (or weaker forms)
One of the most interesting aspects of the axiom of choice is the large number of places in mathematics that it shows up. There are also a remarkable number of important statements that, assuming the axioms of ZF but neither AC nor AC, are equivalent to the axiom of choice. The most important among them are Zorn's lemma and the well ordering theorem: every set can be well ordered. In fact, Zermelo initially introduced the axiom of choice in order to formalize his proof of the well ordering principle. Here are some statements that require the axiom of choice in the sense that they are not provable from ZF but are provable from ZFC (ZF plus AC). Equivalently, these statements are true in all models of ZFC but false in some models of ZF.
Set theory
Any union of countably many countable sets is itself countable.
If the set ''A'' is infinite, then there exists an injection from the natural numbers '''N''' to ''A''.
If the set ''A'' is infinite, then ''A'' and ''A'' ''A'' have the same cardinality. ''(This statement is equivalent to AC (over ZF))''
Trichotomy: If two sets are given, then they either have the same cardinality, or one has a smaller cardinality than the other. ''(This statement is equivalent to AC (over ZF))''
The product of any nonempty family of nonempty sets is nonempty. ''(This statement is equivalent to AC (over ZF))''
Every infinite game mathG(T,X) math where mathX math is either open or closed is determined.
Measure theory
The Vitali theorem on the existence of non measurable sets.
The Hausdorff paradox.
The Banach Tarski paradox.
Algebra
Every vector space has a basis. ''(This statement is equivalent to AC (over ZF))''
Every unital ring other than the trivial ring contains a maximal ideal.
Every field has an algebraic closure.
Every field extension has a transcendence basis.
Every category has a skeleton.
Stone's representation theorem for Boolean algebras needs the Boolean prime ideal theorem.
The Nielsen Schreier theorem, that every subgroup of a free group is free.
The additive groups of '''R''' and '''C''' are isomorphic.
Functional analysis
The Hahn Banach theorem in functional analysis, allowing the extension of linear functionals
The theorem that every Hilbert space has an orthonormal basis.
The Banach Alaoglu theorem about compactness of sets of functionals.
The Baire category theorem about complete metric spaces, and its consequences, such as the open mapping theorem and the closed graph theorem.
General topology
Tychonoff's theorem stating that every product of compact topological spaces is compact. ''(This statement is equivalent to AC (over ZF))''
In the product topology, the closure of a product of subsets is equal to the product of the closures.
Any product of complete uniform spaces is complete.
A uniform space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded.
Every Tychonoff space has a Stone Cech compactification.
Results requiring AC
There are models of Zermelo Fraenkel set theory in which the axiom of choice is false. We will abbreviate "Zermelo Fraenkel set theory plus the negation of the axiom of choice" by ZF C. For certain models of ZF C, it is possible to prove the negation of some standard facts.
Note that any model of ZF C is also a model of ZF, so for each of the following statements, there exists a model of ZF in which that statement is true.
There exists a model of ZF C in which there is a function ''f'' from the real numbers to the real numbers such that ''f'' is not continuous at ''a'', but for any sequence ''xsubn sub'' converging to ''a'', limsub''n'' sub f(''xsubn sub'') f(a).
There exists a model of ZF C in which real numbers are a countable union of countable sets.
There exists a model of ZF C in which there is a field with no algebraic closure.
In all models of ZF C there is a vector space with no basis.
There exists a model of ZF C in which there is a vector space with two bases of different cardinalities.
For proofs, see Thomas Jech, ''The Axiom of Choice'', American Elsevier Pub. Co., New York, 1973.
There exists a model of ZF C in which every set in Rsup''n'' sup is measurable. Thus it is possible to exclude counterintuitive results like the Banach Tarski paradox which are provable in ZFC. Furthermore, this is possible whilst assuming the Axiom of dependent choice, which is weaker than AC but sufficient to develop most of real analysis.
In all models of ZF C, the generalized continuum hypothesis does not hold.
Results requiring choice in intuitionistic logic, though not classically
Interestingly, in various varieties of constructive logic (in particular, intuitionistic logic) in which the law of excluded middle is not assumed, the assumption of the axiom of choice is sufficient to obtain the law of excluded middle as a theorem. To see this, for any proposition mathP ,, math let mathU , math be the set math x in 0, 1 : (x 0) vee P math and let mathV , math be the set math x in 0, 1 : (x 1) vee P math (see Set builder notation). By the axiom of choice, there will exist a choice function mathf , math for the set math U, V , math (note that, although the axiom of choice isn't classically required in order to obtain choice functions for finite sets, it is necessary here in intuitionistic logic). Since mathf(U) in U math and mathf(V) in V math, this implies math (f(U) 0) vee P wedge (f(V) 1) vee P math, which implies mathf(U) neq f(V) vee P math. Since mathP , math implies mathU V 0, 1 , math, it must be that mathP , math implies mathf(U) f(V) , math, so mathf(U) neq f(V) vee P math would imply math neg P vee P math. As this could be done for any proposition mathP , math, this completes the proof that the axiom of choice implies the law of the excluded middle.
The above proof is not valid in all intuitionistic deductive systems. For example, in the intuitionistic type theory of Per Martin L f, the axiom of choice is a theorem, yet excluded middle is not.
Quotes
:The Axiom of Choice is obviously true, the well ordering principle obviously false, and who can tell about Zorn's lemma?
::Jerry Bona
:::This is a joke that although the axiom of choice, the well ordering principle, and Zorn's lemma are mathematically equivalent, most mathematicians find the axiom of choice to be intuitive, the well ordering principle to be counterintuitive, and Zorn's lemma to be too complex for any intuition.
:The Axiom of Choice is necessary to select a set from an infinite number of socks, but not an infinite number of shoes.
::Bertrand Russell
:::The observation here is that one can define a function to select from an infinite number of pairs of shoes by stating for example, to choose the left shoe. Without the axiom of choice, one cannot assert that such a function exists for pairs of socks, because left and right socks are (presumably) identical to each other.
:The axiom gets its name not because mathematicians prefer it to other axioms.
::A. K. Dewdney
:::From the famous April Fool's Day article in the ''computer recreations'' column of the ''Scientific American'', April 1989.
External links
There are many people still doing work on the axiom of choice and its consequences. If you are interested in more, look up .
References
Zermelo, Ernst, "Beweis, dass jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann", ''Mathematische Annalen'', '''59''', 514 516, 1904
Zermelo, Ernst, "Untersuchungen ber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I", ''Mathematische Annalen'', '''65''', 261 281, 1908
Category:Axioms of set theory
Category:Model theory
cs:Axiom v b ru
da:Udvalgsaksiomet
de:Auswahlaxiom
fr:Axiome du choix
ko:
it:Assioma della scelta
he:
hu:Kiv laszt si axi ma
nl:Keuzeaxioma
ja:
pl:Aksjomat wyboru
pt:axioma da escolha
ru:
sv:Urvalsaxiomet
:''For other uses, see Attila (disambiguation).''
, led by Attila (right, foreground), ride into Italy.
'''Attila the Hun''' (Old Norse: ''Atle, Atli'' Middle High German: ''Etzel'' ca. 406453 AD) was the last and most powerful king of the Huns. ! He was from Bulgars clan of Dulo. This information looks bogus. References please He reigned over what was then Europe's largest empire, from 434 until his death. His empire stretched from Central Europe to the Black Sea and from the Danube River to the Baltic. During his rule he was among the direst enemies of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires: he invaded the Balkans twice and encircled Constantinople in the second invasion. He marched through Gaul (later France) as far as Orleans before being turned back at Chalons and he drove the western emperor Valentinian III from his capital at Ravenna in 452.
Though his empire died with him and he left no remarkable legacy, he has become a legendary figure in the history of Europe. In much of Western Europe, he is remembered as the epitome of cruelty and rapacity. In contrast, some histories lionize him as a great and noble king, and he plays major roles in three Norse sagas.
Background and beginnings
:''Main article: Huns''
The European Huns are often thought to have been a western extension of the Xiongnu (''Xi ngn ''), ( ) n., a group of nomad tribes from north eastern China and Central Asia. These people achieved military superiority over their rivals (most of them highly cultured and civilized) by their state of readiness for combat, amazing mobility, and weapons like the Hun bow.
Attila was born around 406. Nothing certain is known about his childhood the supposition that at a young age he was already a capable leader and a capable warrior is reasonable but unknowable.
Following negotiation of peace terms in 418, the young Attila, at the age of 12, was sent as a child hostage to the Roman court of Emperor Honorius. In return, the Huns received Flavius Aetius, in a child hostage exchange arranged by the Romans.
Most likely the empire schooled Attila in its courts, customs and traditions and in its luxurious lifestyle, in the hope that he would carry an appreciation of these things back to his own nation, thus serving to extend Roman influence. The Huns would probably have hoped that Attila would enhance espionage capabilities by the exchange.
Attila attempted escape during his stay in Rome but failed. He turned his attention to an intense study of the empire while outwardly ceasing to struggle against his hostage status. He studied the internal and foreign policies of the Romans. He often secretly observed them in diplomatic conference with foreign ministers. He learned about leadership, protocol and other essentials suited to future rulers and diplomats.
Shared kingship
s of Central Asia into modern Germany, and from the Danube river to the Baltic Sea
By 432, the Huns were united under Ruga. In 434 Ruga died, leaving his nephews Attila and Bleda, the sons of his brother Mundjuk, in control over all the united Hun tribes. At the time of their accession, the Huns were bargaining with Theodosius II's envoys over the return of several renegade tribes who had taken refuge within the Byzantine Empire. The following year, Attila and Bleda met with the imperial legation at Margus (present day Po arevac) and, all seated on horseback in the Hunnic manner, negotiated a successful treaty: the Romans agreed not only to return the fugitive tribes (who had been a welcome aid against the Vandals), but also to double their previous tribute of 350 Roman pounds (ca. 114.5 kg) of gold, open their markets to Hunnish traders, and pay a ransom of eight ''solidi'' for each Roman taken prisoner by the Huns. The Huns, satisfied with the treaty, decamped from the empire and departed into the interior of the continent, perhaps to consolidate and strengthen their empire. Theodosius used this opportunity to strengthen the walls of Constantinople, building the city's first sea wall, and to build up his border defenses along the Danube.
The Huns remained out of Roman sight for the next five years. During this time, they were conducting an invasion of the Persian Empire. However, in Armenia, a Persian counterattack resulted in a defeat for Attila and Bleda, and they ceased their efforts to conquer Persia. In 440, they reappeared on the borders of the empire, attacking the merchants at the market on the north bank of the Danube that had been arranged for by the treaty. Attila and Bleda threatened further war, claiming that the Romans had failed to fulfil their treaty obligations and that the bishop of Margus (not far from modern Belgrade) had crossed the Danube to ransack and desecrate the royal Hun graves on the Danube's north bank. They crossed the Danube and laid waste to Illyrian cities and forts on the river, among them, according to Priscus, Viminacium, which was a city of the Moesians in Illyria. Their advance began at Margus, for when the Romans discussed handing over the offending bishop, he slipped away secretly to the barbarians and betrayed the city to them.
Theodosius had stripped the river's defenses in response to the Vandal Geiseric's capture of Carthage in 440 and the Sassanid Yazdegerd II's invasion of Armenia in 441. This left Attila and Bleda a clear path through Illyria into the Balkans, which they invaded in 441. The Hunnish army, having sacked Margus and Viminacium, took Sigindunum (modern Belgrade) and Sirmium before halting its operations. A lull followed during 442, when Theodosius recalled his troops from North Africa and ordered a large new issue of coins to finance operations against the Huns. Having made these preparations, he thought it safe to refuse the Hunnish kings' demands.
Attila and Bleda responded by renewing their campaign in 443. Striking along the Danube, they overran the military centers of Ratiara and successfully besieged Naissus (modern Ni ) with battering rams and rolling towersmilitary sophistication that was new in the Hun repertorythen pushing along the Nisava they took Serdica (Sofia), Philippopolis (Plovdiv), and Arcadiopolis. They encountered and destroyed the Roman force outside Constantinople and were only halted by their lack of siege equipment capable of breaching the city's massive walls. Theodosius admitted defeat and sent the court official Anatolius to negotiate peace terms, which were harsher than the previous treaty: the Emperor agreed to hand over 6,000 Roman pounds (ca. 1,963 kg) of gold as punishment for having disobeyed the terms of the treaty during the invasion the yearly tribute was tripled, rising to 2,100 Roman pounds (ca. 687 kg) in gold and the ransom for each Roman prisoner rose to 12 ''solidi''.
Their desires contented for a time, the Hun kings withdrew into the interior of their empire. According to Jordanes (following Priscus), sometime during the peace following the Huns' withdrawal from Byzantium (probably around 445), Bleda died (killed by his brother, according to the classical sources), and Attila took the throne for himself. Now undisputed lord of the Huns, he again turned towards the eastern Empire.
Sole ruler
Constantinople suffered major natural (and man made) disasters in the years following the Huns' departure: bloody riots between the racing factions of the Hippodrome plagues in 445 and 446, the second following a famine and a four month series of earthquakes which levelled much of the city wall and killed thousands, causing another epidemic. This last struck in 447, just as Attila, having consolidated his power, again rode south into the empire through Moesia. The Roman army, under the Gothic ''magister militum'' Arnegisclus, met him on the river Vid and was defeatedthough not without inflicting heavy losses. The Huns were left unopposed and rampaged through the Balkans as far as Thermopylae Constantinople itself was saved by the intervention of the prefect Flavius Constantinus, who organized the citizenry to reconstruct the earthquake damaged walls, and in some places to construct a new line of fortification in front of the old. An account of this invasion survives:
: ''The barbarian nation of the Huns, which was in Thrace, became so great that more than a hundred cities were captured and Constantinople almost came into danger and most men fled from it. And there were so many murders and blood lettings that the dead could not be numbered. Ay, for they took captive the churches and monasteries and slew the monks and maidens in great numbers.''
:: Callinicus, in his ''Life of Saint Hypatius''
's painting ''The Feast of Attila'', based on a fragment of Priscus (depicted at right, dressed in white and holding his history):br small"When evening began to draw in, torches were lighted, and two barbarians came forward in front of Attila and sang songs which they had composed, hymning his victories and his great deeds in war. And the banqueters gazed at them, and some were rejoiced at the songs, others became excited at heart when they remembered the wars, but others broke into tearsthose whose bodies were weakened by time and whose spirit was compelled to be at rest." small
Attila demanded, as a condition of peace, that the Romans should continue paying tribute in goldand evacuate a strip of land stretching three hundred miles east from Sigindunum (Belgrade) and up to a hundred miles south of the Danube. Negotiations continued between Roman and Hun for approximately three years. The historian Priscus was sent as emissary to Attila's encampment in 448, and the fragments of his reports preserved by Jordanes offer the best glimpse of Attila among his numerous wives, his Scythian fool, and his Moorish dwarf, impassive and unadorned amid the splendor of the courtiers:
:''A luxurious meal, served on silver plate, had been made ready for us and the barbarian guests, but Attila ate nothing but meat on a wooden trencher. In everything else, too, he showed himself temperate his cup was of wood, while to the guests were given goblets of gold and silver. His dress, too, was quite simple, affecting only to be clean. The sword he carried at his side, the latchets of his Scythian shoes, the bridle of his horse were not adorned, like those of the other Scythians, with gold or gems or anything costly.''
"The floor of the room was covered with woollen mats for walking on," Priscus noted.
During these three years, according to a legend recounted by Jordanes, Attila discovered the "Sword of Mars":
:''The historian Priscus says it was discovered under the following circumstances: "When a certain shepherd beheld one heifer of his flock limping and could find no cause for this wound, he anxiously followed the trail of blood and at length came to a sword it had unwittingly trampled while nibbling the grass. He dug it up and took it straight to Attila. He rejoiced at this gift and, being ambitious, thought he had been appointed ruler of the whole world, and that through the sword of Mars supremacy in all wars was assured to him.''
:: Jordanes, ''The Origin and Deeds of the Goths'' ch. XXXV
Later scholarship would identify this legend as part of a pattern of sword worship common among the nomads of the Central Asian steppes.
Attila in the west
! my guess mirv , depicts him as European, though the only extant description of his appearance by a Roman court historian states that Atilla had "a flat nose, swarthy dark complexion, broad chest, short stature and small eyes, but full of confidence" among his features, suggesting physical features common among Mongolians.
As late as 450, Attila had proclaimed his intent to attack the powerful Visigoth kingdom of Toulouse in alliance with Emperor Valentinian III. He had previously been on good terms with the western Empire and its ''de facto'' ruler Flavius A tiusAetius had spent a brief exile among the Huns in 433, and the troops Attila provided against the Goths and Bagaudae had helped earn him the largely honorary title of ''magister militum'' in the west. The gifts and diplomatic efforts of Geiseric, who opposed and feared the Visigoths, may also have influenced Attila's plans.
However Valentinian's sister Honoria, in order to escape her forced betrothal to a senator, had sent the Hunnish king a plea for helpand her ringin the spring of 450. Though Honoria may not have intended a proposal of marriage, Attila chose to interpret her message as such he accepted, asking for half of the western Empire as dowry. When Valentinian discovered the plan, only the influence of his mother Galla Placidia convinced him to exile, rather than kill, Honoria he also wrote to Attila strenuously denying the legitimacy of the supposed marriage proposal. Attila, not convinced, sent an embassy to Ravenna to proclaim that Honoria was innocent, that the proposal had been legitimate, and that he would come to claim what was rightfully his.
Meanwhile, Theodosius having died in a riding accident, his successor Marcian cut off the Huns' tribute in late 450 and multiple invasions, by the Huns and by others, had left the Balkans with little to plunder. The king of the Salian Franks had died, and the succession struggle between his two sons drove a rift between Attila and Aetius: Attila supported the elder son, while Aetius supported the younger. J.B. Bury believes that Attila's intent, by the time he marched west, was to extend his kingdomalready the strongest on the continentacross Gaul to the Atlantic shore. By the time Attila had gathered his vassalsGepids, Ostrogoths, Rugians, Scirians, Heruls, Thuringians, Alans, Burgundians, et al.and begun his march west, he had declared intent of alliance both with the Visigoths and with the Romans.
In 451, his arrival in Belgica with an army exaggerated by Jordanes to half a million strong soon made his intent clear. On April 7 he captured Metz, and Aetius moved to oppose him, gathering troops from among the Franks, the Burgundians, and the Celts. A mission by Avitus, and Attila's continued westward advance, convinced the Visigoth king Theodoric I (Theodorid) to ally with the Romans. The combined armies reached Orleans ahead of Attila, thus checking and turning back the Hunnish advance. Aetius gave chase and caught the Huns at a place usually assumed to be near Ch lons en Champagne. The two armies clashed in the Battle of Chalons, whose outcome commonly, though erroneously, is attributed to be a victory for the Gothic Roman alliance. Theodoric was killed in the fighting. Aetius failed to press his advantage, and the alliance quickly disbanded. Attila withdrew to continue his campaign against Italy.
Invasion of Italy and death
Attila returned in 452 to claim his marriage to Honoria anew, invading and ravaging Italy along the way his army sacked numerous cities and razed Aquileia completely, leaving no trace of it behind. Valentinian fled from Ravenna to Rome Aetius remained in the field but lacked the strength to offer battle. Attila finally halted at the Po, where he met an embassy including the prefect Trigetius, the consul Aviennus, and Pope Leo I. After the meeting he turned his army back, having claimed neither Honoria's hand nor the territories he desired.
's ''The Meeting between Leo the Great and Attila'' shows Leo I, with Saint Peter and Saint Paul above him, going to meet Attila
Several explanations for his actions have been proffered. The plague and famine which coincided with his invasion may have caused his army to weaken, or the troops that Marcian sent across the Danube may have given him reason to retreat, or perhaps both. Priscus reports that superstitious fear of the fate of Alaricwho died shortly after sacking Rome in 410gave the Hun pause. Prosper of Aquitaine's pious "fable which has been represented by the pencil of Raphael and the chisel of Algardi" (as Gibbon called it) says that the Pope, aided by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, convinced him to turn away from the city. Various historians (e.g. Isaac Asimov) have supposed that the embassy brought a large amount of gold to the Hunnish leader and persuaded him to abandon his campaign.
Whatever his reasons, Attila left Italy and returned to his palace across the Danube. From there he planned to strike at Constantinople again and reclaim the tribute which Marcian had cut off. However, he died in the early months of 453 the conventional account, from Priscus, says that on the night after a feast celebrating his latest marriage (to a beautiful Goth named Ildico), he suffered a severe nosebleed and choked to death in a stupor. An alternative to the nosebleed theory is that he succummed to internal bleeding after heavy drinking. His warriors, upon discovering his death, mourned him by cutting off their hair and gashing themselves with their swords so that, says Jordanes, "the greatest of all warriors should be mourned with no feminine lamentations and with no tears, but with the blood of men." His horsemen galloped in circles around the silken tent when Attila lay in state, singing in his dirge, according to Cassiodorus and Jordanes, "Who can rate this as death, when none believes it calls for vengeance?" then celebrating a ''strava'' over his burial place with great feasting. He was buried in a triple coffinof gold, silver, and ironwith the spoils of his conquest, and his funeral party was killed to keep his burial place secret. After his death, he lived on as a legendary figure: the characters of ''Etzel'' in the ''Nibelungenlied'' and ''Atli'' in both the ''Volsunga saga'' and the ''Poetic Edda'' were both loosely based on his life.
An alternate story of his death, first recorded eighty years after the fact by the Roman chronicler Count Marcellinus, reports: "''Attila rex Hunnorum Europae orbator provinciae noctu mulieris manu cultroque confoditur.''" ("Attila, King of the Huns and ravager of the provinces of Europe, was pierced by the hand and blade of his wife.") The ''Volsunga saga'' and the ''Poetic Edda'' claim that King Atli died at the hands of his wife Gudrun. Most scholars reject these accounts as no more than romantic fables, preferring instead the version given by Attila's contemporary Priscus. The "official" account by Priscus, however, has recently come under renewed scrutiny by Michael A. Babcock (''The Night Attila Died: Solving the Murder of Attila the Hun'', Berkley Books, 2005 ISBN 0425202720). Based on detailed philological analysis, Babcock concludes that the account of natural death, given by Priscus, was an ecclesiastical "cover story" and that Emperor Marcian (who ruled the Eastern Roman Empire from 450 457) was the political force behind Attila's death.
His sons Ellak (his appointed successor), Dengizik, and Ernakh fought over the division of his legacy"what warlike kings with their peoples should be apportioned to them by lot like a family estate" and, divided, were defeated and scattered the following year in the Battle of Nedao by the Gepids, under Ardaric, whose pride was stirred by being treated with his people like chattel, and the Ostrogoths. Attila's empire did not outlast him.
Appearance, character, and name
.
The main source for information on Attila is Priscus, a historian who traveled with Maximin on an embassy from Theodosius II in 448. He describes the village the nomadic Huns had built and settled down in as the size of the great city with solid wooden walls. He described Attila himself as:
: ''"short of stature, with a broad chest and a large head his eyes were small, his beard thin and sprinkled with gray and he had a flat nose and a swarthy complexion, showing the evidences of his origin."''
Attila's physical appearance was most likely that of an Eastern Asian or more specifically a Mongol, or perhaps a mixture of this type and the Turkic peoples of Central Asia. Indeed, he probably exhibited the characteristic Eastern Asian facial features, which Europeans were not used to seeing, and so they often described him in harsh terms.
Attila is known in Western history and tradition as the grim "Scourge of God", and his name has become a byword for cruelty and barbarism. Some of this may arise from a conflation of his traits, in the popular imagination, with those perceived in later steppe warlords such as the Mongol Great Khan Genghis Khan and Tamerlane: all run together as cruel, clever, and sanguinary lovers of battle and pillage. The reality of his character may be more complex. The Huns of Attila's era had been mingling with Roman civilization for some time, largely through the Germanic ''foederati'' of the borderso that by the time of Theodosius's embassy in 448, Priscus could identify Hunnic, Gothic, and Latin as the three common languages of the horde. Priscus also recounts his meeting with an eastern Roman captive who had so fully assimilated into the Huns' way of life that he had no desire to return to his former country, and the Byzantine historian's description of Attila's humility and simplicity is unambiguous in its admiration.
The historical context of Attila's life played a large part in determining his later public image: in the waning years of the western Empire, his conflicts with Aetius (often called the "last of the Romans") and the strangeness of his culture both helped dress him in the mask of the ferocious barbarian and enemy of civilization, as he has been portrayed in any number of films and other works of art. The Germanic epics in which he appears offer more nuanced depictions: he is both a noble and generous ally, as Etzel in the ''Nibelungenlied'', and a cruel miser, as Atli in the ''Volsunga Saga'' and the ''Poetic Edda''. Some national histories, though, always portray him favorably in Hungary and Turkey the names of Attila (sometimes as Atilla in Turkish) and his last wife Ildik remain popular to this day. In a similar vein, the Hungarian author G za G rdonyi's novel ''A l thatatlan ember'' (published in English as ''Slave of the Huns'', and largely based on Priscus) offered a sympathetic portrait of Attila as a wise and beloved leader.
The name Attila may mean "Little Father" in Gothic (''atta'' "father" plus diminutive suffix '' la'') as many Goths were known to serve under Attila. It could also be of pre Turkish (Altaic) origin (compare it with Atat rk and ''Alma Ata'', now called Almaty). It most probably originates from ''atta'' ("father") and ''il'' ("land"), meaning "Land Father". Atil was also the Altaic name of the present day Volga river which may have given its name to Attila.
table width 75 border "2" align "center" style "border collapse: collapse "
trtd width 35 align "center"
Preceded by:br'''Bleda''' td
td width 30 align "center"List of Hun monarchs td
td width 35 align "center"
Succeeded by:br'''Ernakh''' td
tr table
Notes
This younger son may have been Merovech, founder of the Merovingian line, though the sourcesGregory of Tours and a later roster from the Battle of Chalonsare not conclusive.
J.B. Bury, ''The Invasion of Europe by the Barbarians'', lecture IX
Later accounts of the battle place the Huns either already within the city or in the midst of storming it when the Roman Visigoth army arrived Jordanes mentions no such thing. See Bury, ibid.
Marcellinus Comes, ''Chronicon'' , quoted in Hector Munro Chadwick: ''The Heroic Age'' (London, Cambridge University Press, 1926), p. 39 n. 1.
''Volsunga Saga'', ''Poetic Edda'',
See also
Attila the Hun to Charlemagne
Huns
History of Europe
History of the Balkans
List of military commanders
The Mule
References
Classical texts include:
Priscus: ''Byzantine History'', available in the original Greek in Ludwig Dindorf : ''Historici Graeci Minores'' (Leipzig, B.G. Teubner, 1870) and available online as a translation by J.B. Bury: ''''
Jordanes: ''''
Recommended modern works are:
Babcock, Michael A.: "The Night Attila Died: Solving the Murder of Attila the Hun" (Berkley Publishing Group, ISBN 0425202720)
Blockley, R.C.: ''The Fragmentary Classicising Historians of the Later Roman Empire'', vol. II (ISBN 0905205154) (a collection of fragments from Priscus, Olympiodorus, and others, with original text and translation)
C.D. Gordon: ''The Age of Attila: Fifth century Byzantium and the Barbarians'' (Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1960) is a translated collection, with commentary and annotation, of ancient writings on the subject (including those of Priscus).
J. Otto Maenchen Helfen (ed. Max Knight): ''The World of the Huns: Studies in Their History and Culture'' (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1973) is a useful scholarly survey.
E. A. Thompson : ''A History of Attila and the Huns'' (London, Oxford University Press, 1948) is the authoritative English work on the subject. It was reprinted in 1999 as ''The Huns'' in the ''Peoples of Europe'' series (ISBN 0631214437). Thompson did not enter controversies over Hunnic origins, and his revisionist view of Attila read his victories as achieved only while there was no concerted opposition.
External links
A reconstructed , based on historical sources, in a contemporary style.
Edward Gibbon describes Attila in his classic
Excerpt from 'Leadership Secrets of Attila The Hun' By Wess Roberts, Ph.D describing Attila's .
Category:400s births
Category:453 deaths
Category:Ancient Roman enemies and allies
Category:History of Europe
Category:History of Hungary
Category:History of the Germanic peoples
Category:Late Antiquity
Category:Huns
ar:
bg:
cs:Attila
da:Attila
de:Attila
es:Atila
eo:Atilo la Huno
fr:Attila
ko:
hr:Atila
id:Atilla
it:Attila
he:
lt:Atila
hu:Attila (hun uralkod )
ms:Atilla
nl:Attila de Hun
ja:
no:Attila
pl:Attyla
pt: tila o Huno
ro:Attila
ru:
scn:Attila
sl:Atila
sr:
fi:Attila
sv:Attila
tr:Attila
uk:
zh:
The '''Aegean Sea''' is an arm of the Mediterranean Sea, located between the Greek peninsula and Asia Minor. It is connected to the Marmara Sea and Black Sea by the Dardanelles and Bosporus.
Etymology
In ancient times there were various explanations for the name Aegean. It was said to have been named after the town of Aegae, or Aegea, a queen of the Amazons who died in the sea, or Aegeus, the father of Theseus, who drowned himself in the sea when he thought his son had died.
The Greek name for the sea is (Aigaion Pelagos, Modern Greek Ej on P la os) and Ege Denizi in Turkish. A possible etymology is a derivation from the dialect word (aiges) "waves" (Hesychius metaphorical use of (aix) "goat"), hence "wavy sea", cf. also (aigialos) "coast".
History
In ancient times the sea was the birthplace of two ancient civilizations the Minoans of Crete, and the Mycenean Civilization of the Peloponnese. Later arose the city states of Athens and Sparta among many others that constituted the Hellenic Civilization. The Aegean Sea was later inhabited by Persians, Romans, the Byzantine Empire, the Venetians, the Seljuk Turks, and the Ottoman Empire. The Aegean was the site of the original democracies, and it allowed for contact between several diverse civilizations of the Eastern Mediterranean.
Geography
The Aegean islands can be simply divided into seven groups: the Thracian Sea group, the East Aegean group, the Northern Sporades, the Cyclades, the Saronic Islands (or Argo Saronic Islands), the Dodecanese and Crete. The word ''archipelago'' was originally applied specifically to these islands. Many of the Aegean islands, or chains of islands, are actually extensions of the mountains on the mainland. One chain extends across the sea to Chios, another extends across Euboea to Samos, and a third extends across the Peloponnese and Crete to Rhodes, dividing the Aegean from the Mediterranean. Many of the islands have safe harbours and bays, but navigation through the sea is generally difficult. Many of the islands are volcanic, and marble and iron are mined on other islands. The larger islands have some fertile valleys and plains. There are two islands of considerable size belonging to Turkey on the Aegean Sea: Bozcaada (Greek: ''Tenedos'') and G k eada (Greek: ''Imvros'').
The bays in gulfs counterclockwise includes on Crete, the Mirabelli, Almyros, Souda and Chania bays or gulfs, on the mainland the Myrtoan Sea to the west, the Saronic Gulf northwestward, the Petalies Gulf which connects with the South Euboic Sea, the Pagasetic Gulf which connects with the North Euboic Sea, the Thermian Gulf northwestward, the Chalkidiki Peninsula including the Cassandra and the Singitic Gulfs, northward the Strymonian Gulf and the Gulf of Kavala and the rest are in Turkey Saros Gulf, Edremit Gulf, Dikili Gulf, andarl Gulf, zmir Gulf, Ku adas Gulf, G kova Gulf, G ll k Gulf.
Port towns
The Aegean Sea has many ports especially on the islands, for ports, see the island chains or its gulfs and bays.
See also
Aegean civilization
Aegean dispute
List of traditional Greek place names
Category:Mediterranean
ar:
ast:Mar Ex u
bg:
ca:Mar Egea
cs:Egejsk mo e
da: g iske Hav
de: g is
et:Egeuse meri
el:
es:Mar Egeo
eo:Egea Maro
fr:Mer g e
gl:Mar Exeo
ko:
it:Mar Egeo
he:
la:Mare Aegaeum
lt:Eg jo j ra
nl:Ege sche Zee
ja:
no:Egeerhavet
pl:Morze Egejskie
pt:Mar Egeu
ru:
sk:Egejsk more
sl:Egejsko morje
sr:
fi:Aigeianmeri
sv:Egeiska havet
tr:Ege Adalar
uk:
zh:
200px thumb right ''A Clockwork Orange'' book cover
''This article describes the novel by Anthony Burgess. For other uses of the term '''Clockwork Orange''', see 'Clockwork Orange (disambiguation)'.
'''''A Clockwork Orange''''' is a science fiction and dystopian 1962 novel by Anthony Burgess, and forms the basis for the 1971 film adaptation by Stanley Kubrick.
It is one of Burgess's "terminal novels", written to provide posthumous income for his wife after Burgess had allegedly been diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumour.
Burgess wrote that the title came from an old Cockney expression "As queer as a clockwork orange." Due to his time serving the British Colonial Office in Malaya, Burgess thought that the phrase could be used to punningly refer to a mechanically responsive (clockwork) non human (orang, Malay for "person"). The Italian title, "Un'Arancia ad Orologeria" was interpreted to refer to a grenade. Burgess wrote in his later introduction, "A Clockwork Orange Resucked," that a creature who can only perform good or evil is "a clockwork orangemeaning that he has the appearance of an organism lovely with colour and juice but is in fact only a clockwork toy to be wound up by God or the Devil."
In his essay "Clockwork Oranges" he says that "this title would be appropriate for a story about the application of Pavlovian, or mechanical, laws to an organism which, like a fruit, was capable of colour and sweetness." This title alludes to the protagonist's negatively conditioned responses to feelings of evil which prevent the exercise of his free will.
The book was partly inspired by an event in 1944, when Burgess' pregnant wife Lynne was robbed and beaten by four U.S. GI deserters in a London street, suffering a miscarriage and chronic gynaecological problems. According to Burgess, writing the novel was both a catharsis and an "act of charity" towards his wife's attackers the story is narrated by and essentially sympathetic to one of the attackers rather than their victim.
Synopsis
Set in the near future, the book centres around the life of the fifteen year old protagonist Alex DeLarge. Alex and his gang roam the streets at night, committing crimes purely for enjoyment. The crimes described in the book increase in severity, from assault, to robbery, to a fight with rival gang, culminating when the gang breaks into the house of F.D. Alexander and rapes his wife. The gang returns to a bar where Alex hits one of his gang members, Dim, as punishment for Dim's rude behaviour towards a woman who was singing the chorus of ''Ode to Joy'', classical music being Alex's other passion, apart from violence. This sparks off a tense moment between the two gang members.
The next day, after fighting Dim and George to re establish his control of the gang following the previous night's dispute Alex agrees, on Pete's suggestion, to rob a house in a rich part of town. Alex tries to persuade the woman living in the house to open the door. The woman refuses and calls the police as a precaution. He gains access to the house through a window, but is confronted by the defiant woman, who defends herself with unexpected strength, he goes for a bust of Beethoven and she scratches his face, he manages to knock her out with a silver statue he had previously taken. As he runs out the front door he is struck by Dim who runs off with the rest of the gang just as the police arrive. At the police station we learn that the woman has died.
In prison, Alex hears about an experimental rehabilitation programme called "the Ludovico technique", which promises that the prisoner will be released upon completion of the two week treatment and will not commit crimes afterwards and manages to become the first patient. The Ludovico technique itself is a form of aversion therapy, where Alex is given a drug that induces extreme nausea while being forced to watch graphically violent films. At the end of the treatment Alex is unable to carry out or even contemplate violent acts as doing so induces crippling nausea.
He is released from prison, but upon returning home he is rejected by his parents. Dejected, Alex contemplates suicide, going to the public library in order to discover what sort of poison he might take to end his life. There he is spotted by one of his former victims, who accompanied by his friends extracts his revenge. Alex is unable to strike back and the police is alerted. The police arrive, but they turn out to be Dim, and Billy Boy, the former leader of a rival gang. They take Alex, beat him up and dump him by the side of the road out in the country.
Alex stumbles to the nearest house for help, which turns out to be that of F.D. Alexander, whose wife Alex had raped and beaten earlier in the book. At first Alex is not recognised as he had always worn a mask, but the reader discovers that F.D. Alexander is in a wheel chair and his wife died from her injuries. Realising that Alex is the same person who had attacked him and his wife some years ago, F.D. Alexander drugs him, locks him in a room and plays Beethoven s 9th Symphony at full volume. Although previously his favourite piece of music the Ninth was also used as a soundtrack for one of the films that Alex was forced to watch as part of the Ludovico treatment, hence it produces the same nauseating effects on him. Unable to stand the pain Alex throws himself out of the window to try to kill himself. He survives the fall with broken bones and wakes up in hospital informed that his tormentors have been arrested and the Ludovico treatment reversed.
The final chapter begins identically to the first, Alex having formed a new gang and reverted to his previous criminality. But on this particular night he decides not to join them and goes for a walk on his own instead. In a cafe he bumps into one of his old gang member Pete, who is married and has become a respectable member of society. Pete's wife giggles at Alex's rhetoric, and asks Pete "why does he speak like that?" After conversing with Pete and his wife, Alex has an epiphany, renouncing violence on one hand, but on the other concluding that his behaviour was an unavoidable part of youth, and that if he had a son, he would not be able to stop him from doing what he did.
Although the book is divided into three parts, each containing seven chapters, twenty one being a symbolic number as it was the age that which a child earns his rights at the time, the 21st chapter was omitted from the versions published in the US. The film adaptation which was directed by Stanley Kubrick follows the American version of the book, ending prior the events of the 21st chapter. Kubrick claimed that he had not read the original version until he had virtually finished the screenplay, but that he certainly never gave any serious consideration to using it.
Analysis
The book, narrated by Alex, contains many words in a slang dialect which Burgess invented for the book, called nadsat. It is a mix of modified Russian words, English slang and words invented by Burgess himself. It serves two functions, firstly Burgess, while wanting to provide his young characters with their own register did not want to use contemporary slang, fearing that this would "date" the book too much. Secondly, the novel graphically describes horrific scenes of violence, which would be shocking even by today's standards, so nadsat is used as a "linguistic veil" to distance the reader from the action on the page.
Influence
Both the story and individual elements have had a strong influence on popular culture in general and popular music in particular.
Trivia
Alex's age at the end of the novel is the same age that the Burgesses' miscarried child would have been at the date of publication, had the child survived the attack on Lynne, been born and grown up.
The allegedly Cockney phrase ''A Clockwork Orange'' is totally unknown to history: the first recorded use of it is Burgess's title. Quoted in a ''Rolling Stone'' article, Burgess claimed to have first heard the expression "from a very old Cockney in 1945."
Burgess claimed that he had typed the title ''A Clockwork Orange'' and then sat down to think of a story to go with it. One early idea apparently involved a strike or riot among apprentices under Elizabeth I.
As with many writers and their most popular books, this was one of Burgess's least favourite of the books he wrote, and he thought it was overrated.
Since, in ''A Clockwork Orange,'' the author F. Alexander wrote a book entitled ''A Clockwork Orange'' and it is his wife who is attacked by the droogs, it seems likely Burgess directly inserted some of his own feelings and characteristics into the novel in the form of this character.
See also
A Clockwork Orange (film)
Aestheticization of violence
Nadsat, a fictional slang used in the book
Dystopia
References
''A Clockwork Orange: A play with music''. Century Hutchinson Ltd. (1987). An extract is quoted on several web sites: , .
Burgess, Anthony (1978). Clockwork Oranges. In ''1985''. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 0091360803 ()
Vidal, Gore. "Why I am eight years younger than Anthony Burgess," in ''At home : essays, 1982 1988'', p. 411. New York: Random House, 1988. ISBN 0394570200.
External links
A Prophetic Masterpiece: http: www.city journal.org html 16 1 oh to be.html
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
Clockwork Orange, A
! There are two interwikis for de: es: fr: pt:, because book and movie are on separate articles on those four wikis.
de:A Clockwork Orange (Buch)
es:La naranja mec nica
fr:L'Orange m canique
he:
nl:A Clockwork Orange
ja:
ko:
pl:Mechaniczna pomara cza
pt:Laranja Mec nica
div class "townBox" style "border:1px solid dddddd margin left:0.5em width: 200px "
center'''Amsterdam''' center
Location
Flag
Country
:Netherlands
Province
:North Holland
Population
:742,951(1 January 2005)
Coordinates
:
Website
:
Mayor
:Job Cohen
div
'''Amsterdam''', () the capital of the Netherlands, lies on the banks of two bodies of water, the IJ bay and the Amstel river. Founded in the late 12th century as a small fishing village on the banks of the Amstel, it is now the largest city in the country and its financial and cultural centre. As of 2005, the population of the city proper is 742,951 the population of the greater Amsterdam area is approximately one and a half million.
Amsterdam has one of the largest historic city centres in Europe, dating largely from the 17th century, the Golden Age of the Netherlands, of which it was the focal point. At this time, a series of concentric, semi circular canals were built around the older city centre, which still defines its layout and appearance today. Many fine houses and mansions are situated along the canals most are lived in, others are now offices, and some are public buildings. Some of the narrow brick houses are gradually sinking because they are built on piles to cope with the marshy subsoil.
The city is noted for many outstanding museums, including the Rijksmuseum, the Van Gogh Museum, the Stedelijk Museum, Rembrandt House Museum, the Anne Frank House, and its world class symphony orchestra, the Concertgebouworkest, whose home base is the Concertgebouw. Notable are also its red light district, ''de Wallen'', and its numerous "coffee shops" selling cannabis.
Although Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands, it is neither the capital of the province in which it is located, North Holland (which is Haarlem), nor the seat of government (which is The Hague).
History
''Main article: History of Amsterdam''
Amsterdam was founded as a fishing village in the 13th century. According to legend Amsterdam was founded by two Frisian fishermen, who landed on the shores of the Amstel in a small boat with their dog. The damming of the river Amstel gave it its name. It was given city rights in 1300 or 1301. From the 14th century on, Amsterdam flourished, largely on the basis of trade with the cities of the Hanseatic League.
The 16th century brought a rebellion by the Dutch against Philip II of Spain and his successors, escalating into the Eighty Years' War which ultimately led to Dutch independence. The Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance and Jews from Spain and Portugal, prosperous merchants from Antwerp (economic and religious refugees from the part of the Low Countries still controlled by Spain), Huguenots from France (persecuted for their religion) sought safety in Amsterdam. It was the rich, refined migrants from Flanders who set the tone (their Brabant dialects became the basis of standard written Dutch) and made Holland a mercantile power.
The 17th century is considered Amsterdam's "Golden Age". In the early 17th century Amsterdam was the richest city in Europe. Ships sailed from Amsterdam to North America, Africa and present day Indonesia and Brazil and formed the basis of a worldwide trading network. Amsterdam's merchants had the biggest share in the VOC and WIC. These companies acquired the overseas possessions which formed the seeds of the later Dutch colonies. Amsterdam was the most important point for the trans shipment of goods in Europe and it was the leading financial centre of the world. Amsterdam's stock exchange was the first to trade continuously.
The population grew from slightly over 10,000 around 1500 to 30,000 around 1570, 60,000 around 1600, 105,000 in 1622 and almost 200,000 around 1700 (a twenty fold increase in 200 years). Thereafter, the population did not change much for another century and a half. During the century before World War II it almost quadrupled to 800,000, but then remained fairly constant again to this day.
small The 18th and early 19th centuries saw a decline in Amsterdam's prosperity. The wars of the Dutch Republic with the United Kingdom and France took their toll on Amsterdam. During the Napoleonic Wars Amsterdam's fortunes reached their lowest point. However, with the establishment of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815, things slowly began to improve. In Amsterdam new developments were started by people like Sarphati who found their inspiration in Paris.
The end of the 19th century is sometimes called Amsterdam's second Golden Age. New museums, a train station, and the Concertgebouw were built. At this time the Industrial Revolution reached Amsterdam. The ''Amsterdam Rhine Canal'' was dug to give Amsterdam a direct connection to the Rhine and the ''North Sea Canal'' to give the port a shorter connection to the North Sea. Both projects improved communication with the rest of Europe and the world dramatically.
Shortly before the First World War the city began expanding and new suburbs were built. During World War I, the Netherlands remained neutral. Amsterdam suffered a food shortage and heating fuel became scarce. The shortages sparked riots in which several people were killed.
Germany invaded the Netherlands in 10 May 1940, taking control of the country after five days of fighting. The Germans installed a Nazi civilian government in Amsterdam that cooperated in the persecution of Jews. More than 80,000 Jews were deported to concentration camps, of whom perhaps the most famous was a young German girl, Anne Frank. Only 5,000 Jews survived the war. In the last months of the war communication with the rest of the country broke down and food and fuel became scarce. Many inhabitants of the city had to travel to the countryside to collect food. Most of the trees in Amsterdam were cut down for fuel.
Coat of arms
The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of three St Andrew's crosses, aligned vertically, but rotated 90 degrees for the flag. Historians believe they represent the three dangers which have traditionally plagued the city: flood, fire, and pestilence. The city's official motto, ''Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig'' ("Valiant, Resolute, Merciful") which is displayed on the coat of arms, was bestowed on it by Queen Wilhelmina in 1947 in recognition of the city's bravery during World War II. The lions were added in the sixteenth century.
The crown was awarded to the city in 1489 by Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, out of gratitude for services and loans. The crown was a sign of imperial protection and acted as a seal of approval for Amsterdam merchants abroad. The Westertoren also features the imperial crown.
City government
''Main article: Amsterdam (municipality)''
As all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a mayor, his ''wethouders'' (aldermen), and the municipal council. However, unlike most other Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is subdivided into fifteen ''stadsdelen'' (boroughs), a system that was implemented in the 1980s to improve local governance. The ''stadsdelen'' are responsible for many activities that previously had been run by the central city. Fourteen of these have their own council, chosen by a popular election. The fifteenth, Westerpoort, covers the harbour of Amsterdam, has very few inhabitants, and is governed by the central municipal council. Local decisions are made at borough level, and only affairs pertaining to the whole city, such as major infrastructure projects, are handled by the central city council.
''See also:'' List of mayors of Amsterdam
Demography
center Demography 12col 830px 1300 1400 1500 1600 1650 1796 1830 1849 1879 1899 1925 1999
1,000 3,000 12,000 60,000 140,000 200,600 202,400 224,000 317,000 510,900 714,200 727,100 center
Academia
Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the Vrije Universiteit. Other institutions for higher education include an art school, De Rietveldacademie, the Hogeschool van Amsterdam, the Hogeschool voor Economische Studies Amsterdam and the Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten, which includes the Sweelinck Conservatorium. Amsterdam's International Institute of Social History is one of the world's largest documentary and research institutions concerning social history, and especially the history of the labour movement. Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus, founded in the early 1600s, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the world, with many old and rare specimens, amongst which the coffee plant that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and South America.
, is known for its modern architecture.
Public transport
Public transport in Amsterdam, operated by Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf, Connexxion, and Nederlandse Spoorwegen, consists of:
national and international train connections
3 metro lines and 1 light rail line, together the Amsterdam metro
16 tram lines
An express tram line (IJtram)
55 local bus lines
regional bus lines
several ferries for pedestrians and cyclists across the IJ (free of charge)
a Fast Flying Ferry towards Velsen Zuid on the North Sea shore
A new underground line, the North South Line (''Noord Zuidlijn'') is under construction. (See also Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf, Amsterdam metro, Amsterdam Centraal).
History
During the construction of the Amsterdam metro, plans to demolish the entire Jewish neighbourhood near the Nieuwmarkt led to strong protests. The metro was still built (wall decorations at the Nieuwmarkt station are dedicated to the protests), but plans to build a highway through the neighbourhood in the centre of Amsterdam were abolished. In 1975 there was an incident where a planned bombing of the Venserpolder station led to a political scandal when mayor Ivo Samkalden and everyone in the city council, except for Roel van Duijn, instantly and erroneously blamed the left wing protesters, which was exactly the objective of the right wing bombers.
Private transport
Many people in Amsterdam use bicycles to get around. Most main streets have bike paths. Bike racks are ubiquitous throughout the city. In the city centre, driving a car is complicated by traffic jams and limited and expensive parking space.
Airport
Schiphol, about twenty minutes by train from downtown Amsterdam, is the biggest airport in the Netherlands, and the fourth largest in Europe. It handles about 42 million passengers a year and is home base to KLM.
Sports
Amsterdam is the home town of Ajax, a team in the Dutch Football League. Its home base is the modern stadium Amsterdam ArenA, located in the south east of the city. The team shares that facility with the Amsterdam Admirals, an American football team.
In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Games of the IXth Olympiad. The Olympic Stadium built for the occasion has been completely restored and is now used for cultural and sporting events.
Amsterdam also is home to a famous ice rink, the Jaap Eden baan. The Amstel Tijgers play in this arena in the Dutch ice hockey premier league. In speed skating many international championships have been fought in the 400 meter lane of this ice rink.
The city also has a baseball team, the Amsterdam pirates who play in the Dutch Major League. Three field hockey teams, Amsterdam, Pinok and Hurley, and a basketball team, the Amsterdam Astronauts who play in the Dutch premier division and play their games in the Sporthallen Zuid, near the Olympic Stadium.
Periodic events
Koninginnedag, ''Queen's day'', 30 April, the former Queen's (Juliana) birthday
Uitmarkt, last weekend in August, the start of the cultural season
''Amsterdam Roots'', last week of June. International music festival
''Amsterdam Pride'', mid August, gay pride weekend
''Amsterdam Marathon'', mid October
Sail Amsterdam, a five yearly event, when tall ships from all over the world can be visited.
Cannabis Cup, mid November annual cannabis competition, hosted by High Times.
Famous Amsterdammers
Karel Appel painter
Dennis Bergkamp football player
Frits Bolkestein politician
George Hendrik Breitner painter
Simon Carmiggelt writer and columnist
Johan Cruijff football player
Candy Dulfer saxophonist
Max Euwe chess player
Anne Frank Holocaust diarist
Theo van Gogh filmmaker and colummnist
Vincent van Gogh painter
Ruud Gullit football player
Andr Hazes singer
Freddy Heineken beer magnate
Meindert Hobbema painter
Jozef Isra ls painter
Wim Kok former prime minister
Karel Miljon boxer
Harry Mulisch writer
Multatuli writer
Rembrandt painter
Frank Rijkaard football player
Baruch Spinoza philosopher
Paul Verhoeven film director
Notes
div style "font size: 90 "
div
External links
()
Netherlands, Amsterdam
Category:Cities in the Netherlands
Category:Eurovision host cities
Category:Host cities of the Summer Olympic Games
Category:North Holland
af:Amsterdam (Nederland)
ar:
be:
bg:
bs:Amsterdam
ca:Amsterdam
cs:Amsterdam
da:Amsterdam
de:Amsterdam
et:Amsterdam
el:
es:Amsterdam
eo:Amsterdamo
fr:Amsterdam
fy:Amsterdam
gl: msterdam Amsterdam
ko:
hr:Amsterdam
io:Amsterdam
id:Amsterdam
is:Amsterdam
it:Amsterdam
he:
csb:Amsterdam
lv:Amsterdama
la:Amstelodamum
lt:Amsterdamas
lb:Amsterdam
li:Amsterdam
na:Amsterdam
nl:Amsterdam
ja:
no:Amsterdam
nn:Amsterdam
pl:Amsterdam
pt:Amsterd o
ro:Amsterdam
ru:
scn:Amsterdam
simple:Amsterdam
sk:Amsterdam
sl:Amsterdam
sr:
fi:Amsterdam
sv:Amsterdam
tr:Amsterdam
uk:
zh:
The '''Museum of Work''', or ''Arbetets museum'', is a museum located in Norrk ping, Sweden. The museum can be found in the 19th century building ''The Iron'' in the Motala str m river in central Norrk ping.
''See also: List of museums in Sweden, Culture of Sweden''
External links
Official site
Category:Museums in Sweden
Category:Norrk ping
An '''automobile''' is a wheeled vehicle that carries its own motor. Different types of automobiles include cars, buses, trucks, vans, and motorcycles, with cars being the most popular. The term is derived from Greek 'autos' (''self'') and Latin 'mov re' (''move''), referring to the fact that it 'moves by itself'. Earlier terms for automobile include 'horseless carriage' and 'motor car'. An automobile has seats for the driver and, almost without exception, one or more passengers. It is the main source of transportation across the world.
As of 2005 there are 500 million cars worldwide (0.074 per capita), of which 220 million are located in the United States (0.75 per capita).
History
The history of automobiles The modern automobile powered by the Otto gasoline engine was invented in Germany by Karl Benz. Even though Karl Benz is credited with the invention of the modern automobile, several other German engineers worked on building the first automobile at the same time. These inventors are: Karl Benz on July 3, 1886 in Mannheim, Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach in Stuttgart (also inventors of the first motor bike) and in 1888 89 German Austrian inventor Siegfried Marcus in Vienna, although Marcus didn't go beyond the prototype stage.
'''Steam powered vehicles'''
Steam powered self propelled cars were devised in the late 18th century. The first self propelled car was built by Nicolas Joseph Cugnot in 1769, it could attain speeds of up to 6 km h. In 1771 he designed another steam driven car, which ran so fast that it rammed into a wall, producing the world s first car accident.
The Internal Combustion Engine
In 1806 Fransois Isaac de Rivaz, a Swiss, designed the first internal combustion engine (sometimes abbreviated "ICE" today). He subsequently used it to develop the world s first vehicle to run on such an engine, one that used a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen to generate energy. It was not very successful, as was the case with the British inventor, Brown, and the American inventor, Morey, who produced clumsy IC engine powered vehicles about 1826.
Etienne Lenoir produced the first successful internal combustion engine in 1860, and within a few years, about 400 were in operation in Paris. In about 1863, Lenoir installed his engine in a vehicle. It seems to have been powered by city lighting gas in bottles, and was said by Lenoir to have "travelled slower than a man could walk, with breakdowns being frequent." Lenoir, in his patent of 1860, included the provision of a carburettor, so liquid fuel could be substituted for gas, particularly for mobile purposes, i.e., vehicles. Lenoir is said to have tested liquid fuel, such as alcohol, in his stationary engines but it doesn't appear he used them in his vehicle. If he did, he most certainly didn't use gasoline, as this was not well known and was considered a waste product.
The next innovation comes in the late 1860s, with Siegfried Marcus, a German working in Vienna, Austria. He developed the idea of using gasoline as a fuel in a two stroke internal combustion engine. In 1870, he built a crude vehicle, with no seats, steering or brakes, but it was spectacular for one reason: it was the world's first internal combustion engine powered vehicle fueled by gasoline. It was tested in Vienna in September of 1870. In 1888 1889, he built a second car, this one with seats, brakes and steering, and a four stroke engine of his own design.
The four stroke engine had already been written down and patented in 1862 by the Frenchman Beau de Rochas in a long winded and rambling pamphlet. He printed about 300 copies of his pamphlet and they were distributed in Paris, but nothing came of this, with the patent expiring soon after and the pamphlet disappearing into total obscurity. In fact, hardly anyone knew of it to begin with. Beau de Rochas never built a single engine.
Most historians agree that Nikolaus Otto of Germany built the world's first four stroke engine. He knew nothing of Beau de Rochas's patent or idea, and came upon the idea entirely on his own in fact, he began thinking about it in 1861, but abandoned the idea until the mid 1870's. There is some evidence, although not conclusive, that one Christian Reithmann, an Austrian living in Germany, had built a four stroke engine entirely on his own by 1873. Reithmann had been experimenting with IC engines as early as 1852.
In 1883, Edouard Delamare Deboutteville and Leon Malandin of France installed an internal combustion engine powered by a tank of city gas on a tricycle. As they tested the vehicle, the tank hose came loose, resulting in an explosion. In 1884, Delamare Deboutteville and Malandin built and patented a second vehicle. This one consisted of two four stroke, liquid fueled engines mounted to an old four wheeled horse cart. The patent, and presumably the vehicle, contained many innovations, some of which wouldn't be used for decades. However, during the vehicle's first test, the frame broke apart, the vehicle literally "shaking itself to pieces," in Malandin's own words. No more vehicles were built by the two men, and their venture went completely unnoticed and their patent unexploited. No one else knew of the vehicles and experiments until years later.
Supposedly in the late 1870's, an Italian named Murnigotti patented the idea of installing an IC engine on a vehicle, although there is no evidence one was built. In 1884, Enrico Bernardi, another Italian, installed an IC engine on his son's tricycle. Although nothing more than a toy, it is said to have operated somewhat successfully in one source, but another says the engine's power was too feeble to make the vehicle move.
But if all of the above experiments hadn't taken place, the development of the automobile wouldn't have been retarded by so much as a moment, since they were unknown experiments that went no further than the testing stage. The internal combustion engined car really can be said to have begun with Benz and Daimler in 1886, for their vehicles were successful, they went into series production, and they inspired others.
Benz, after building his first three wheeled car in 1885, built improved versions in 1886 and 1887, and went into production in 1888 the world's first vehicle to do so. Approximately 25 were built until 1893, when his first four wheeler was introduced. They were powered with four stroke engines of his own design. Emile Roger of France, already producing Benz engines under license, now added the Benz car to his line of products. Because France was more open to the automobile in general, more were built and sold in France than by Benz himself in Germany.
Daimler built a car in 1886 a new horse carriage fitted with his new high speed 4 stroke engine. In 1889, he built two vehicles from scratch, with several innovations. From about 1890 1895 about 30 vehicles were built by Daimler and his innovative assistant, Maybach, either at the Daimler works or in the Hotel Hermann, where they set up shop after having a falling out with their backers.
In 1890, Emile Levassor and Armand Peugeot of France began series producing vehicles with Daimler engines, and so laid the foundation of the motor industry in France. They were inspired by Daimler's Stalhradwagen of 1889, which was exhibited in Paris in 1889.
The first American automobile with gasoline powered internal combustion engines was supposedly designed in 1877 by George Baldwin Selden of Rochester, New York, who applied for a patent on the automobile in 1879. Selden didn't build a single car until 1905, when he was forced to do so due to the lawsuit. Selden received his patent and later sued the Ford Motor Company for infringing his patent. Henry Ford was notoriously against the American patent system, and Selden's case against Ford went all the way to the Supreme Court, who ruled that Ford and everyone else was free to build automobiles without paying royalties to Selden, since automobile technology had improved since Selden's patent, and no one was building those antiquated designs.
Meanwhile, notable advances in steam power evolved in Birmingham, England by the Lunar Society. It was here that the term horsepower was first used. It was in Birmingham also that the first British four wheel petrol driven automobiles were built in 1895 by Frederick William Lanchester who also patented the disc brake in the city. Electric vehicles were produced by a small number of manufacturers.
Innovation
The first automobile patent in the United States was granted to Oliver Evans in 1789 in 1804 Evans demonstrated his first successful self propelled vehicle, which not only was the first automobile in the US but was also the first amphibious vehicle, as his steam powered vehicle was able to travel on wheels on land and via a paddle wheel in the water.
On 5 November, 1895, George B. Selden was granted a United States patent for a two stroke automobile engine (). This patent did more to hinder than encourage development of autos in the USA. A major breakthrough came with the historic drive of Bertha Benz in 1888. Steam, electric, and gasoline powered autos competed for decades, with gasoline internal combustion engines achieving dominance in the 1910s.
The large scale, production line manufacturing of affordable automobiles was debuted by Oldsmobile in 1902, then greatly expanded by Henry Ford in the 1910s. Development of automotive technology was rapid, due in part to the hundreds of small manufacturers competing to gain the world's attention. Key developments included electric ignition and the electric self starter (both by Charles Kettering, for the Cadillac Motor Company in 1910 1911), independent suspension, and four wheel brakes.
Model changeover and design change
, a modern family car which has gone through a number of changes.
Cars are not merely continually perfected mechanical contrivances since the 1920s nearly all have been mass produced to meet a market, so marketing plans and manufacture to meet them have often dominated automobile design. It was Alfred P. Sloan who established the idea of different makes of cars produced by one firm, so that buyers could "move up" as their fortunes improved. The makes shared parts with one another so that the larger production volume resulted in lower costs for each price range. For example, in the 1950s, Chevrolet shared hood, doors, roof, and windows with Pontiac the LaSalle of the 1930s, sold by Cadillac, used the cheaper mechanical parts made by the Oldsmobile division.
Alternative fuels and batteries
With heavy taxes on fuel, particularly in Europe and tightening environmental laws, particularly in California, and the possibility of further restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions, work on alternative power systems for vehicles continues.
Diesel powered cars can run with little or no modification on 100 pure biodiesel, a fuel that can be made from vegetable oils. Many cars that currently use gasoline can run on ethanol, a fuel made from plant sugars. Most cars that are designed to run on gasoline are capable of running with 15 ethanol mixed in, and with a small amount of redesign, gasoline powered vehicles can run on ethanol concentrations as high as 85 . All petrol fuelled cars can run on LPG. There has been some concern that the ethanol gasoline mixtures prematurely wear down seals and gaskets. Further, the use of higher levels of alcohol requires that the automobile carry use twice as much. Therefore, if your vehicle is capable of 300 miles on a 15 gallon tank, the efficiency is reduced to approximately 150 miles. Of course, certain measures are available to increase this efficiency, such as different camshaft configurations, altering the timing spark output of the ignition, or simply, using a larger fuel tank.
In the United States, alcohol fuel was produced in corn alcohol stills until Prohibition criminalized the production of alcohol in 1919. Brazil is the only country which produces ethanol running cars, since the late 1970s.
Attempts at building viable battery powered electric vehicles continued throughout the 1990s (notably General Motors with the EV1), but cost, speed and inadequate driving range made them uneconomical. Battery powered cars have used lead acid batteries which are greatly damaged in their recharge capacity if discharged beyond 75 on a regular basis and NiMH batteries.
Current research and development is centered on "hybrid" vehicles that use both electric power and internal combustion. The first hybrid vehicle available for sale in the USA was the Honda Insight. As of 2005, The car is still in production and achieves around 60 mpg.
Other R D efforts in alternative forms of power focus on developing fuel cells, alternative forms of combustion such as GDI and HCCI, and even the stored energy of compressed air (see water Engine).
Safety
in Paris, France
Automobiles were a significant improvement in safety on a per passenger mile basis, over the horse based travel that they replaced. Millions have been able to reach medical care much more quickly when transported by ambulance.
Accidents seem as old as automobile vehicles themselves. Joseph Cugnot crashed his steam powered "Fardier" against a wall in 1770. The first recorded automobile fatality was Bridget Driscoll on 1896 08 17 in London and the first in the United States was Henry Bliss on 1899 09 13 in New York City, NY.
Cars have two basic safety problems: They have human drivers who make mistakes, and the wheels lose traction near a half gravity of deceleration. Automated control has been seriously proposed and successfully prototyped. Shoulder belted passengers could tolerate a 32G emergency stop (reducing the safe intervehicle gap 64 fold) if high speed roads incorporated a steel rail for emergency braking. Both safety modifications of the roadway are thought to be too expensive by most funding authorities, although these modifications could dramatically increase the number of vehicles that could safely use a high speed highway.
Early safety research focused on increasing the reliability of brakes and reducing the flammability of fuel systems. For example, modern engine compartments are open at the bottom so that fuel vapors, which are heavier than air, vent to the open air. Brakes are hydraulic so that failures are slow leaks, rather than abrupt cable breaks. Systematic research on crash safety started in 1958 at Ford Motor Company. Since then, most research has focused on absorbing external crash energy with crushable panels and reducing the motion of human bodies in the passenger compartment.
There are standard tests for safety in new automobiles, like the EuroNCAP and the tests. There are also tests run by organizations such as and backed by the insurance industry.
Despite technological advances, there is still significant loss of life from car accidents: About 40,000 people die every year in the U.S., with similar figures in Europe. This figure increases annually in step with rising population and increasing travel if no measures are taken, but the rate per capita and per mile travelled decreases steadily. The death toll is expected to nearly double worldwide by 2020. A much higher number of accidents result in injury or permanent disability. The highest accident figures are reported in China and India. The European Union has a rigid program to cut the death toll in the EU in half by 2010 and member states have started implementing measures.
Current Production
In 2005 63 million cars and light trucks were produced worldwide. The world's biggest car producer (including light trucks) is the European Union with 29 of the world's production. In non EU Eastern Europe another 4 are produced. The second largest manufacturer is NAFTA with 25.8 , followed by Japan with 16.7 , China with 8.1 , MERCOSUR with 3.9 , India with 2.4 and the rest of the world with 10.1 . (vda link)
Large free trade areas like EU, NAFTA and MERCOSUR attract manufacturers worldwide to produce their products within them and without currency risks or customs, additionally to being close to customers. Thus the production figures do not show the technological ability or business skill of the areas. In fact much if not most of the Third World car production is used western technology and car models (and sometimes even complete obsolete western factories shipped to the country), which is reflected in the patent statistic as well as the locations of the r d centers.
The automobile industry is dominated by relatively few large corporations (not to be confused with the much more numerous brands), the biggest of which (by numbers of produced cars) are currently General Motors, Toyota and Ford Motor Company. It is expected, that Toyota will reach the No.1 position in 2006. The most profitable per unit carmaker of recent years has been Porsche due to their premium price tag.
The automotive industry at large still suffers from high under utilization of its manufacturing potential.
Future of the car
In order to limit deaths, there has been a push for self driving automobiles. Much of the drive for computer driven vehicles has been led by DARPA with their race.
A current and powerful invention was ESP by Bosch and many followers that reduces deaths by about 30 and is recommended by many lawmakers and carmakers to be a standard feature in all cars sold in the EU. ESP recognizes dangerous situations and corrects the drivers input for a short moment to stabilize the car.
The biggest threat to automobiles is the declining supply of oil, which does not completely stop car usage but makes it significantly more expensive. Beginning of 2006 a gallon of gas costs approx. 6 US in Germany and other European countries. If no cheap solution can be found in the relatively near future individual mobility might suffer a major setback. Nevertheless, individual mobility is highly prized in modern societies so the demand for automobiles will remain just with a different power source.
Looking at automotive technology some areas appear to have the most need of development. For example, both the rubber tires and the batteries currently used by most cars seem rather antiquated when compared to,say, modern day engines and traction control systems. These are like jets with cardboard wings or PCs with 10 KB hard drives respectively. While slow moving cars can control their wheels via ESP reasonably well, fast moving vehicles like a Bugatti Veyron need a special tire checkup before approaching 400 km h. Also the existing batteries are barely fit to handle the cars electronics but are far off from the ability to store enough energy for moving the car unassisted.
See also
Carfree movement
Effects of the automobile on societies
List of automobile manufacturers
List of recent automobile models by type
U.S. Automobile Production Figures
Car dealership
Car handling
Car safety
''Unsafe at Any Speed'' by Ralph Nader
Crash test dummy
Car washing techniques
List of automotive superlatives, Lists of automobiles for a structured list.
List of automotive packages (cosmetic and functional features sold as a group)
Road traffic accident
hybrid cars
Portal:Cars
Major possible subsystems
engine
carburetor or fuel injection
fuel pump
engine configuration: Wankel or reciprocating (V, inline, flat).
engine management systems
exhaust system
ignition system
self starter
emissions control devices
turbochargers and superchargers
front engine
rear engine
mid engine
Ancillary power mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, vacuum, air
drivetrain
transmission (gearbox)
manual transmission
semi automatic transmission
fully automatic transmission
Layout
FF layout
FR layout
MR layout
RR layout
Drive Wheels
2 wheel drive
4 wheel drive
Front wheel drive
Rear wheel drive
All wheel drive
differential
limited slip differential
locking differential
axle
Live axle
brakes
disc brakes
drum brakes
anti lock braking systems (ABS)
wheels and tires
custom wheels
steering
rack and pinion
Ackermann steering geometry
Caster angle
Camber angle
Kingpin
suspension
MacPherson strut
wishbone
double wishbone
multi link
torsion beam
semi trailing arm
axle
body
crumple zones
monocoque (or unibody) construction
:Category:Car doors
spoiler
Japan Black (fore runner of modern automotive finishes)
interior equipment
passive safety
seat belts
airbags
child safety locks
dashboard
shifter for selecting gear ratios
ancillary equipment such as stereos, air conditioning, cruise control, car phones, positioning systems, cup holders, etc.
exterior equipment
windows
Power window
windshield
Daytime running lamps
External links
bg:
ca:Autom bil
cs:Automobil
da:Bil
de:Automobil
es:Autom vil
eo:A tomobilo
fa:
fr:Automobile
gl:Autom bil
ko:
hr:Automobil
id:Mobil
it:Autovettura
he:
la:Autocinetum
lt:Automobilis
mk:
ms:Kereta
na:Auto
nv:Chid
nl:Auto
ja:
no:Bil
nn:Bil
os:
pl:Samoch d
pt:Autom vel
ro:Automobil
ru:
simple:Car
sk:Automobil
sl:Avtomobil
sr:
su:Otomotif
fi:Auto
sv:Bil
th:
tr:Otomobil
uk:
zh:
'''Audi''' is an automobile maker in Germany, and is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Volkswagen Group. The company is headquartered in Ingolstadt, Bavaria, Germany.
Audi's German tagline is "Vorsprung durch Technik". The tagline is used either in original or in its English translation "Progress through Technology".
History
The origins of Audi
The company traces its origins back to 1899 and August Horch. The first Horch automobile was produced in 1901 in Zwickau, in former East Germany. In 1910, Horch was forced out of the company he had founded. He then started a new company in Zwickau and continued using the Horch brand. His former partners sued him for trademark infringement and a German court determined that the Horch brand belonged to his former company. August Horch was forced to refrain from using his own family name in his new car business. As the word "horch!" translates to "listen!" in German, August Horch settled on the Latin equivalent of his name "audi!". It is also popularly believed that Audi is an acronym which stands for "Auto Union Deutschland Ingolstadt". Audi produces over 2 million vehicles annually at its main production site in Ingolstadt. Audi has another production plant in Neckarsulm.
Audi started with a 2612 cc model followed by a four cylinder model with 3564 cc, as well as 4680 cc and 5720 cc models. These cars were successful even in sporting events. August Horch left the Audi company in 1920. The first six cylinder model (4655 cc) appeared in 1924. In 1928, the company was acquired by J S Rasmussen, owner of DKW, who bought the same year the remains of the US automobile manufacturer, Rickenbacker including the manufacturing equipment for eight cylinder engines. These engines were used in ''Audi Zwickau'' and ''Audi Dresden'' models that were launched in 1929. At the same time, six cylinder and a small four cylinder (licensed from Peugeot) models were manufactured. Audi cars of that era were luxurious cars equipped with special bodywork.
The Auto Union era
In 1932 Audi merged with Horch, DKW and Wanderer to form the Auto Union.
Before World War II, Auto Union used the four interlinked rings that make up the Audi badge today, representing these four brands. This badge was used, however, only on Auto Union racing cars in that period while the member companies used their own names and emblems. The technological development became more and more concentrated and some Audi models were propelled by Horch or Wanderer built engines.
Pause and a new start
Auto Union plants were heavily bombed and partly destroyed during World War II. After the war, Zwickau soon became part of the German Democratic Republic and Audi headquarters were moved to Ingolstadt. In that period, the four interlinked rings were used together with the DKW badge. The company focused efforts on the DKW brand, but their two stroke engines became unpopular. In 1958, Daimler Benz acquired 88 per cent of Auto Union and the next year became its sole owner. Daimler Benz developed a 72 hp (54 kW) four door sedan, with a modern four stroke engine driving the front wheels. This model appeared in September 1965, "relaunching" the Audi brand. Daimler Benz sold the company to Volkswagen in 1964 subsequently, Volkswagen's purchase of Auto Union has led to the modernization of VW to which it gained expertise in manufacturing water cooled vehicles. Today, aircooled powerplants once produced by VW are no longer placed into production vehicles since December 23, 2005.
thumb right 250px Audi 60 (1968 1972)
In 1969, Audi merged with NSU, based in Neckarsulm near Stuttgart. In the 1950s NSU had been the world's largest manufacturer of motorcycles but had moved on to produce small cars like the NSU Prinz (the TT and TTS versions are still popular as vintage race cars). NSU then focused on new rotary engines according to the ideas of Felix Wankel. In 1967, the new NSU Ro 80 was a space age car well ahead of its time in technical details such as aerodynamics, light weight, safety, et cetera, but teething problems with the rotary engines put an end to the independence of NSU. Presently several lines of Audi cars are produced in Neckarsulm.
The mid sized car that NSU had been working on, the K70, was intended to slot between the rear engined Prinz models and the futuristic Ro 80. However, Volkswagen took the K70 for its own range, spelling the end of NSU as a separate brand.
The modern era of Audi
thumb right 250px Audi Quattro
The first Audi of the modern era was the Audi 100 of 1968. This was soon joined by the Audi 80 Fox (which formed the basis for the 1973 Volkswagen Passat) in 1972.
The Audi image at this time was a conservative one, and so, a proposal from chassis engineer Jorg Bensinger was accepted to develop the four wheel drive technology in Volkswagen's Iltis military vehicle for an Audi performance car and rally racing car. The performance car was named the "Quattro," a turbocharged coup which was also the first production vehicle to feature full time all wheel drive through a center differential. Commonly referred to as the "Ur Quattro" (the "Ur " prefix is a German augmentative used, in this case, to mean "original" and is also applied to the first generation of Audi's S4 and S6 sport sedans, as in "UrS4" and "UrS6"), few of these vehicles were produced (all hand built by a single team) but the model was a great success in rallying. Prominent wins proved the viability of all wheel drive racecars, and the Audi name became associated with advances in automotive technology,
In 1986, as the Passat based Audi 80 was beginning to develop a kind of "grandfather's car" image, the type 89 was introduced. This completely new development sold extremely well. However, its modern and dynamic exterior belied the low performance of its base engine, and its base package was quite spartan (even the passenger side mirror was an option.) In 1987, Audi put forward a new and very elegant Audi 90, which had a much superior set of standard features. In the early nineties, sales began to slump for the Audi 80 series, and some basic construction problems started to surface.
This decline in sales was not helped in the USA by a ''60 Minutes'' report which purported to show that Audi automobiles suffered from "unintended acceleration". The ''60 Minutes'' report was based on customer reports of acceleration when the brake pedal was pushed. Independent investigators concluded that this was most likely due to a close placement of the accelerator and brake pedals (unlike American cars), and the inability, when not paying attention, to distinguish between the two. (In race cars, when manually downshifting under heavy braking, the accelerator has to be used in order to match revs properly, so both pedals have to be close to each other to be operated by the right foot at once, toes on the brake, heels on the gas. US citizens are used to automatic gearboxes and only two well separated pedals). This was never an issue in Europe, as Europeans in general use manual transmission gears, and have a "feeling" for vehicle revs in comparison to the speed of the car.
''60 Minutes'' ignored this fact and rigged a car to perform in an uncontrolled manner. The report immediately crushed Audi sales, and Audi renamed the affected model (The 5000 became the 100 200 in 1989, as in Germany and elsewhere). Audi had contemplated withdrawing from the American market until sales began to recover in the mid 1990s. The turning point for Audi was the sale of the new A4 in 1996, and with the release of the A4 6 8 series, which was developed together with VW and other sister brands (so called "platforms").
Currently, Audi's sales are growing strongly in Europe, and the company is renowned for having the best build quality of any mainstream auto manufacturer. 2004 marked the 11th straight increase in sales, selling 779,441 vehicles worldwide. Record figures were recorded from 21 out of about 50 major sales markets. The largest sales increases came from Eastern Europe ( 19.3 ), Africa ( 17.2 ) and the Middle East ( 58.5 ). In March of 2005, Audi is building its first two dealerships in India following its high increase in sales in that region. Though its brand still doesn't have the global cachet of Mercedes Benz or BMW, Audi's reputation for quality and understated style has once again made it a highly desirable marque.
However, after 2003, with the release of the new A4, and in 2004 with the new A6, Audi's dedication to quality had finally paid off when it started to receive news reports and various vehicle critics praising Audis over Mercedes Benz and BMW.
Auto racing
Audi has competed in (and sometimes dominated) numerous forms of auto racing. Audi's rich tradition in motorsport began with the Auto Union in the 1930s. In the 1990s Audi dominated the Touring and Super Touring categories of motor racing after success in circuit racing Stateside.
Rallying
In 1980 Audi released the Quattro, an all wheel drive turbocharged car that went on to win rallies and races worldwide. It is considered one of the most significant rally cars of all time because it was one of the first to take advantage of the then recently changed rules which allowed the use of all wheel drive in competition racing. Many critics doubted the viability of all wheel drive racers, thinking them to be too heavy and complex, yet the Quattro was an instant success, winning its first rally on its first outing. It won competition after competition for the next two years.
In 1984 Audi launched the "Sport Quattro" car which dominated races in Monte Carlo and Sweden with Audi taking all podium finishes but succumbed to problems further into World Rally Championship contention. After another season mired in mediocre finishes, Walter R hrl finished the season in his Sport Quattro S1 and helped place Audi second in the manufacturer's points. Audi also received rally honors in the Hong Kong to Beijing rally in that same year. Mich le Mouton, the first female WRC driver to win a championship and a driver for Audi, took the Sport Quattro S1, now simply called the S1 and raced in the Pikes Peak Hill Climb. The climb race pits a driver and car to drive up a 4,302 meter high mountain in Colorado and in 1985, Mich le Mouton set a new record of 11:25.39 and being the first woman to set a Pikes Peak record. In 1986, Audi formally left international rally racing following an accident in Portugal involving driver Joaquim Santos in his RS200. Santos swerved to avoid hitting spectators in the road, and left the track into the crowd of spectators on the side, killing three and injuring 30. Bobby Unser used an Audi in that same year to claim a new record for the Pikes Peak Hill Climb at 11:09.22.
Motorsports in the USA
In 1987, Walter R hrl claimed the title for Audi setting a new record of 10:47.85 in his Audi S1 he retired from the WRC in 2 years earlier. The Audi S1 employed Audi's time tested 5 cylinder turbo charged engine and generated over 600 hp (447 kW). The engine was mated to a 6 speed gearbox and ran on Audi's famous all wheel drive system. All of Audi's top drivers drove this beast, Hannu Mikkola, Stig Blomqvist, Walter R hrl and the female driver, Mich le Mouton. The Audi S1 enjoys a 0 60 mph (0 100 km h) time of 2.3 s. This Audi S1 started the S series of cars for Audi which now represents an increased level of sports options and quality to the Audi line up.
As Audi moved away from rallying and into circuit racing, they chose first into America with the Trans Am in 1988,
In 1989, Audi moved to IMSA GTO with the 90, however as they avoided the two major endurance events (Daytona and Sebring) despite winning on a regular basis, they would lose out on the title.
Touring cars
In 1990, having completed their objective to market cars in the United States, Audi returned to Europe turning first to the DTM series with the Audi V8, then in 1993, being unwilling to build cars for the new formula, they turned their attention to the fast growing Supertouring series, which took place nationally, first in the French Supertourisme and Italian Superturismo. In the following year, Audi would switched to the German Super Tourenwagen (known as STW) and then to BTCC (British Touring Car Championship) the year after that.
The FIA, having difficulty regulating the Quattro system and what impact it had on the competitors, would eventually ban all four wheel drive cars from competiting in 1998, by then Audi switched all their works efforts to sportscar racing.
By 2000, Audi would still compete in the US with their RS4 for the SCCA Speed World GT Challenge, through dealer team Champion Racing competing against Corvettes, Vipers, and smaller BMWs (where it is one of the few series to permit 4WD cars). In 2003, Champion Racing entered an RS6. Once again, the quattro was superior and Champion Audi won the championship. They returned in 2004 to defend their title but a newcomer, Cadillac, gave them a run for their money. After four victories in a row, the Audis were sanctioned with several negative changes that deeply affected the car's performance.
In 2004, after years of competiting with the TT R in the revitalised DTM series, with privateer team Abt Racing taking the 2002 title with Laurent Aiello, Audi returned as a full factory effort to touring car racing by entering two factory supported Joest Racing A4s.
Sports car racing
Beginning in 1999, Audi built the Audi R8 to compete in sports car racing, including the LMP900 class at the 24 hours of Le Mans. The factory supported Joest Racing team won at Le Mans three times in a row (2000 2002), as well as winning every race in the American Le Mans Series in its first year. Audi also sold the car to customer teams such as Champion Racing. In 2003, two Bentley Speed 8s, with engines designed by Audi and driven by Joest drivers ''loaned'' to the fellow VW company, competed in the GTP class and finished the race in the top two positions, while the Champion Racing R8 finished third overall and first in the LMP900 class. Audi returned to the winner's circle at the 2004 race, with the top three finishers all driving R8s: Audi Sport Japan Team Goh finished first, Audi Sport UK Veloqx second, and Champion Racing third.
At the 2005 24 Hours of Le Mans, Champion Racing entered two R8s along with an R8 from the Audi PlayStation Team Oreca. The R8s (which were built to old LMP900 regulations) received a more narrow air inlet restrictor, cutting power, and an additional 50 kg of weight compared to the newer LMP1 chassis. On average, the R8s were about 2 3 seconds off pace compared to the Pescarolo Judd. But with a team of excellent drivers and experience, both Champion R8s were able to take first and third while the ORECA team took fourth. The Champion team was also the first American team to win Le Mans since the Gulf Ford GT's in 1967. This also ends the long era of the R8, however its replacement for 2006, called the Audi R10, was unveiled on December 13, 2005. the R10 employs many new features, including a twin turbocharged diesel engine. Its first race will likely be the 2006 12 Hours of Sebring as a race test for the 2006 24 Hours of Le Mans.
Technology
Audi is the only car manufacturer that produces 100 galvanized vehicles to prevent corrosion. Along with other precautionary measures, the thus achieved full body zinc coating has proved to be very effective in preventing rust and corrosion perforation. The body's resulting durability even surpassed Audi's own expectations, causing the manufacturer to extend its original 10 year warranty against corrosion perforation to currently 12 years. An all aluminium car was brought forward by Audi, and in 1994 the Audi A8 was launched, which introduced aluminium space frame technology. Audi introduced a new series of vehicles in the mid nineties and continues to pursue leading edge technology and high performance.
The all aluminium concept was extended to the company's new sub compact, the Audi A2 which was launched in 2001.
In the 1970's, some vehicle manufacturers including Audi (and Subaru) designed their own all wheel drive systems in passenger vehicles. In the 1980's, all wheel drive systems in cars became a fad, and other manufacturers like Porsche and Mercedes Benz offered all wheel drive systems in their cars to compete in the marketplace. Unfortunately, the all wheel drive system in the Mercedes Benz vehicles were riddled with problems right from the design sheet. The system also was not popular in Porsche vehicles because owners wanted the traditional performance of the rear wheel drive they got used to in older Porsches. Although Porsche and Mercedes Benz offer all wheel drive systems in some cars today, neither manufacturer was able to ride the fad and come out on top like Audi has. Today, after many decades of class leading technology and engineering, the name ''quattro'' is an identifiable symbol and trademark that shows would be competitors the level of quality they have to achieve in order to attempt to compete with Audi.
In the 1980s, Audi was the champion of the inline 5 cylinder, 2.1 2.2 L engine as a longer lasting alternative to more traditional 6 cylinder engines. This engine was used in not only production cars but also their race cars. The 2.1 L inline 5 cylinder engine was used as a base for the rally cars in the 1980's, providing well over 400 horsepower (298 kW) after modification. Before 1990, there were engines produced with a displacement between 2.0 L and 2.3 L. This range of engine capacity was a good combination of good fuel economy which was on the mind of every motorist in the 1980's, and a good amount of power the customer wants.
Through the early 1990's, Audi began to move more towards the position of being a real competitor in it's target market against Mercedes Benz and BMW. This began with the release of the Audi V8 in 1990. It was essentially a new engine fitted to the Audi 100 200, but with noticeable bodywork differences. Most obvious was the new grille that was now incorprated in the bonnet.
By 1991, Audi had the 4 cylinder Audi 80, the 5 cylinder Audi 90 and Audi 100, the turbocharged Audi 200 and the Audi V8. There was also a coupe version of the 80 90 with both 4 and 5 cylinder engines.
Although the five cylinder engine was a successful and very robust powerplant, it was still a little too different for the target market. With the introduction of an all new Audi 100 in 1992, Audi introduced a 2.8l V6 engine. This engine was also fitted to a face lifted Audi 80 (all 80 and 90 models were now badged 80 except for the USA), giving this model a choice of 4, 5 and 6 cylinder engines, in sedan, coupe and cabriolet body styles.
The 5 cylinder was soon dropped as a major engine choice, however a turbocharged 230BHP (169kW) version remained. The engine, initially fitted to the 200 quattro 20V of 1991, was a derivative of the engine fitted to the Sport Quattro. It was fitted to the Audi Coupe and named the S2 and also to the Audi 100 body, and named the S4. These two models were the beginning of the mass produced S series of performance cars.
The Audi A8 replaced the V8 in 1994, with a revolutionary Aluminium Space Frame (ASF) to save weight. The weight reduction was offset by the quattro all wheel drive system, however it meant the car had similar performance to its rivals, but far superior handling.
The next major model change was in 1995 when the Audi A4 replaced the Audi 80. The new nomenclature scheme was applied to the Audi 100 to become the Audi A6 (with a minor facelift). This also meant the S4 became the S6 and a new S4 was introduced in the A4 body. The S2 was discontinued. The Audi Cabriolet continued on (based on the Audi 80 platform) until 1999, gaining the engine upgrades along the way. A new A3 (based on the Volkswagen Golf) was introduced to the range in 1997, and the radical TT coupe and roadster were debuted in 1998 based on the same underpinnings. Another interesting model introduced was the Mercedes Benz A Class competitor, the Audi A2. The model sold relatively well in Europe, however Audi decided not to develop a new model and it has since been discontinued as of 2004.
The engines available throughout the range were now a 1.4 L, 1.6 L and 1.8 L 4 cylinder, 1.8 turbo, 2.6 L and 2.8 L V6, 2.2 L turbo charged 5 cylinder and the 4.2 L V8. The V6's were replaced by new 2.4 and 2.8 L 30V V6's in 1998, with marked improvement in power, torque and smoothness. Further engines were added along the way, including a 3.7 L V8 and 6.0 L W12 for the A8.
At the turn of the century, Audi introduced the direct shift gearbox (DSG), a manual transmission driveable like an automatic transmission. The system includes dual electrohydraulically controlled clutches instead of a torque converter. This is implemented in some Volkswagen Golf, Audi A3 and TT models. The engine range was continually upgraded, with a 2.7 L twin turbo V6 being offered in the Audi S4, A6 and allroad, the 2.8 L V6 was replaced by a 3.0 L unit.
New models of the A3, A4, A6 and A8 have been introduced, with the 1.8 L engine now 2.0 L and the 3.0 L V6 is now 3.1 L in size. Audi has now introduced FSI on some of their engines, including the 1.6 L 4 cylinder, a new 2.0 L (Audi was the first manufacturer in the world to utilize a turbo charger and FSI on the same powerplant), and the 3.1 L V6. This is a direct fuel injection technique that Audi had also used on its diesel engines since the early 1980s.
As a premium member of the VW Group, technologies are frequently first introduced to the mass market with Audi vehicles before being 'trickled down' to more value oriented brands such as VW, SEAT and koda. Recent examples of this include DSG and FSI.
Audi now has an impressive range of cars, engines and transmissions available, which continue to lead the way and introduce new technologies into the market.
Models
Production cars
A2
A3
S3
A4
S4
RS4
A6
S6
RS6
Q7
A8
S8
TT
Historical models
Audi 50
Audi 80 90 4000
Audi 100 200 5000
Audi Quattro
Audi V8
Audi UrS4 S6
model
Future models
''The following is a list of models Audi ostensibly plans to offer in the future.''
A5
RS4
Q5
R8
Concepts
''The following is a partial list of concept cars.''
Audi RSQ designed exclusively for the 2004 film I, Robot.
Audi Allroad Quattro Concept
Audi Shooting Brake, design study for the next generation TT
Audi Avus Quattro
Audi Quattro Spyder
Audi Avantissimo
Audi Pikes Peak
Audi Nuvolari Quattro
Audi Le Mans Quattro
Audi Roadjet
See also
Audi Centre of Excellence
Audi Driving Experience
Austin Audi Club
External links
Enthusiast forums, recalls, TSBs, photo galleries, and general tech help.
Audi
Category:Bavaria
Category:German automobile manufacturers
Category:Luxury car manufacturers
Category:Saxony
Category:Volkswagen
bg:
cs:Audi
da:Audi
de:Audi
es:Audi
fi:Audi
fr:Audi
he:
id:Audi
it:Audi
ja:
nl:Audi
no:Audi
pl:Audi
pt:Audi
ru:
sk:Audi
sv:Audi
tr:Audi
zh:
thumb right 350px A Japan Airlines Boeing 747 400. This is a wide bodied long haul '''aircraft'''
An '''aircraft''' is any machine capable of atmospheric flight.
! English word "aircraft" is singuar and plural with no "s". See also the link to Wiktionary below.
Categories and classification
Aircraft fall into two broad categories:
Heavier than air
Heavier than air aerodynes, including autogyros, helicopters and variants, and conventional fixed wing aircraft (airplanes or aeroplanes). Fixed wing aircraft generally use an internal combustion engine in the form of a piston engine (with a propeller) or a turbine engine (jet or turboprop), to provide thrust that moves the craft forward through the air. The movement of air over the airfoil produces lift that causes the aircraft to fly. Exceptions are gliders which have no engines and gain their thrust, initially, from winches or tugs and then from gravity and thermal currents. For a glider to maintain its forward speed it must descend in relation to the air (but not necessarily in relation to the ground). Helicopters and autogyros use a spinning rotor (a ''rotary wing'') to provide lift helicopters also use the rotor to provide thrust. The abbreviation VTOL is applied to aircraft other than helicopters that can take off or land vertically. STOL stands for Short Take Off and Landing.
Lighter than air
thumb right 200px A hot air balloon takes off from Royal Victoria Park, Bath, England
Lighter than air aerostats: hot air balloons and airships. Aerostats use buoyancy to float in the air in much the same manner as ships float on the water. In particular, these aircraft use a relatively low density gas such as helium, hydrogen or heated air, to displace the air around the craft. The distinction between a balloon and an airship is that an airship has some means of controlling both its forward motion and steering itself, while balloons are carried along with the wind.
Types of aircraft
:''See also: List of aircraft''
There are several ways to classify aircraft. Below, we describe classifications by design, propulsion and usage.
By design
thumb right 350px A size Comparation of some of the largest airplanes in the world. The Airbus A380 800, the Boeing 747 400 (largest airliner to date) The Antonov An 225 (aircraft with the greatest payload) and the Hughes H 4 "Spruce Goose" (largest airplane in the world) designed by the famous Howard Hughes
A first division by design among aircraft is between lighter than air, '''aerostat''', and heavier than air aircraft, '''aerodyne'''.
Examples of lighter than air aircraft include non steerable balloons, such as hot air balloons and gas balloons, and steerable airships (sometimes called dirigible balloons) such as blimps (that have non rigid construction) and rigid airships that have an internal frame. The most successful type of rigid airship was the Zeppelin. Several accidents, such as the Hindenburg fire at Lakehurst, NJ, in 1937 led to the demise of large rigid airships.
In heavier than air aircraft, there are two ways to produce lift: aerodynamic lift and engine lift. In the case of aerodynamic lift, the aircraft is kept in the air by wings or rotors (see aerodynamics). With engine lift, the aircraft defeats gravity by use of vertical
Examples of engine lift aircraft are rockets, and VTOL aircraft such as the Hawker Siddeley Harrier.
Among aerodynamically lifted aircraft, most fall in the category of fixed wing aircraft, where horizontal airfoils produce lift, by profiting from airflow patterns determined by Bernoulli's equation and, to some extent, the Coanda effect.
The forerunner of these type of aircraft is the kite. Kites depend upon the tension between the cord which anchors it to the ground and the force of the wind currents. Much aerodynamic work was done with kites until test aircraft, wind tunnels and now computer modelling programs became available.
In a "conventional" configuration, the lift surfaces are placed in front of a control surface or tailplane. The other configuration is the canard where small horizontal control surfaces are placed forward of the wings, near the nose of the aircraft. Canards are becoming more common as supersonic aerodynamics grows more mature and because the forward surface contributes lift during straight and level flight.
The number of lift surfaces varied in the pre 1950 period, as biplanes (two wings) and triplanes (three wings) were numerous in the early days of aviation. Subsequently most aircraft are monoplanes. This is principally an improvement in structures and not aerodynamics.
Other possibilities include the delta wing, where lift and horizontal control surfaces are often combined, and the flying wing, where there is no separate vertical control surface (e.g. the B 2 Spirit).
A variable geometry ('swing wing') has also been employed in a few examples of combat aircraft (the F 111, Panavia Tornado, F 14 Tomcat and B 1 Lancer, among others).
The lifting body configuration is where the body itself produce lift. So far the only significant practical application of the lifting body is in the Space Shuttle, but many aircraft generate lift from nothing other than wings alone.
A second category of aerodynamically lifted aircraft are the rotary wing aircraft. Here, the lift is provided by rotating aerofoils or rotors. The best known examples are the helicopter, the autogyro and the tiltrotor aircraft (such as the V 22 Osprey). Some craft have reaction powered rotors with gas jets at the tips but most have one or more lift rotors powered from engine driven shafts.
A further category might encompass the wing in ground effect types, for example the Russian ekranoplan also nicknamed the "Caspian Sea Monster" and hovercraft most of the latter employing a skirt and achieving limited ground or water clearance to reduce friction and achieve speeds above those achieved by boats of similar weight.
A recent innovation is a completely new class of aircraft, the fan wing. This uses a fixed wing with a forced airflow produced by cylindrical fans mounted above. It is (2005) in development in the United Kingdom.
And finally the flapping wing ornithopter is a category of its own. These designs may have potential but are not yet practical.
By propulsion
engined DeHavilland Twin Otter adapted as a floatplane.
Some types of aircraft, such as the balloon or glider, do not have any propulsion. Balloons drift with the wind, though normally the pilot can control the altitude either by heating the air or by releasing ballast, giving some directional control (since the wind direction changes with altitude). For gliders, takeoff takes place from a high location, or the aircraft is pulled into the air by a ground based winch or vehicle, or towed aloft by a powered "tug" aircraft. Airships combine a balloon's buoyancy with some kind of propulsion, usually propeller driven.
Until World War II, the internal combustion piston engine was virtually the only type of propulsion used for powered aircraft. (See also: Aircraft engine.) The piston engine is still used in the majority of aircraft produced, since it is efficient at the lower altitudes used by small aircraft, but the radial engine (with the cylinders arranged in a circle around the crankshaft) has largely given way to the horizontally opposed engine (with the cylinders lined up on two sides of the crankshaft). Water cooled V engines, as used in automobiles, were common in high speed aircraft, until they were replaced by jet and turbine power. Piston engines typically operate using avgas or regular gasoline, though some new ones are being designed to operate on diesel or jet fuel. Piston engines normally become less efficient above 7,000 8,000 ft (2100 2400 m) above sea level because there is less oxygen available for combustion to solve that problem, some piston engines have mechanically powered compressors (blowers) or turbine powered turbochargers or turbonormalizers that compress the air before feeding it into the engine these piston engines can often operate efficiently at 20,000 ft (6100 m) above sea level or higher, altitudes that require the use of supplemental oxygen or cabin pressurisation.
During the forties and especially following the 1973 energy crisis, development work was done on propellers with swept tips or even scimitar shaped blades for use in high speed commercial and military transports.
Pressurised aircraft, however, are more likely to use the turbine engine, since it is naturally efficient at higher altitudes and can operate above 40,000 ft. Helicopters also typically use turbine engines. In addition to turbine engines like the turboprop and turbojet, other types of high altitude, high performance engines have included the ramjet and the pulse jet. Rocket aircraft have occasionally been experimented with. They are restricted to rather specialised niches, such as spaceflight, where no oxygen is available for combustion (rockets carry their own oxygen).
By usage
The major distinction in aircraft usage is between military aviation, which includes all uses of aircraft for military purposes (such as combat, patrolling, search and rescue, reconnaissance, transport, and training), and civil aviation, which includes all uses of aircraft for non military purposes.
Military aircraft
' Light Combat Aircraft.
Combat aircraft like fighters or bombers represent only a minority of the category. Many civil aircraft have been produced in separate models for military use, such as the civil Douglas DC 3 airliner, which became the military C 47 C 53 R4D transport in the U.S. military and the "Dakota" in the U.K. and the Commonwealth. Even the small fabric covered two seater Piper J3 Cub had a military version, the L 4 liaison, observation and trainer aircraft. In the past, gliders and balloons have also been used as military aircraft for example, balloons were used for observation during the American Civil War and World War I, and cargo gliders were used during World War II to land intruding German troops in a few European countries in the 1940 42 period, while Allied troops used them in landings on Sicily and Italy, 1943, and in Western Europe France and Holland on D Day (the Normandy 6 June 1944 Operation Overlord invasion) and in Operation Anvil Dragoon (1944) and in Operation Market Garden (1944).
Combat aircraft themselves, though used a handful of times for reconnaissance and surveillance during the Italo Turkish War, did not come into widespread use until the Balkan War when first air dropped bomb was invented and widely used by Bulgarian air force against Turkey. During World War I many types of aircraft were adapted for attacking the ground or enemy vehicles ships guns aircraft, and the first aircraft designed as bombers were born. In order to prevent the enemy from bombing, fighter aircraft were developed to intercept and shoot down enemy aircraft. Tankers were developed after World War II to refuel other aircraft in mid air, thus increasing their operational range. By the time of the Vietnam War, helicopters had come into widespread military use, especially for transporting, supplying, and supporting ground troops.
Civil aviation
thumb right 250px Bell 206 Bell 206B JetRanger III '''helicopter'''
Civil aviation includes both scheduled airline flights and general aviation, a catch all covering other kinds of private and commercial use. The vast majority of flights flown around the world each day belong to the general aviation category, ranging from recreational balloon flying to civilian flight training to business trips to firefighting to medevac flights to cargo transportation on freight aircraft.
Within general aviation, the major distinction is between private flights (where the pilot is not paid for time or expenses) and commercial flights (where the pilot is paid by a customer or employer). Private pilots use aircraft primarily for personal travel, business travel, or recreation. Usually these private pilots own their own aircraft and take out loans from banks or specialized lenders to purchase them. Commercial general aviation pilots use aircraft for a wide range of tasks, such as flight training, pipeline surveying, passenger and freight transport, policing, crop dusting, and medical transport (medevac). Piston powered propeller aircraft (single engine or twin engine) are especially common for both private and commercial general aviation, but even private pilots occasionally own and operate helicopters like the Bell JetRanger or turboprops like the Beechcraft King Air. Business jets are typically flown by commercial pilots, although there is a new generation of small jets arriving soon for private pilots.
See also
List of aircraft by category
List of aircraft by date and usage category
List of civil aircraft
List of helicopter models
List of military aircraft
List of notable aircraft
List of World War II jet aircraft
List of aircraft engines
List of aircraft engine manufacturers (alphabetical)
Aerial refuelling
Aeronautics
Aircraft carrier
Aircraft spotting
Airline call signs
Airliner
Air safety
Aviation
Contrail
First flying machine
Flight controls
Flight instruments
Gliding
Lifting body
List of early flying machines
Model aircraft
Category:Notable Aircraft
Richard Pearse
Spacecraft propulsion
Spacecraft
Steam aircraft
Successful aircraft types
Undercarriage
Wright brothers
List of aviation, aerospace and aeronautical terms
External links
'''History'''
Excellent online collection with a particular focus on history of aircraft and spacecraft
'''Information'''
Information Portal about Homebuilt Aircraft
published on Usenet
'''Patents'''
US ''Flying machine'' O. W. Wright
! The below are interlanguage links.
Category:Aircraft
Category:Aviation
Category:Notable Aircraft
ar:
af:Vliegtuig
bg:
zh min nan:Hui h ng ki
ca:Aeronau
cs:Letadlo
da:Luftfart j
de:Luftfahrzeug
es:Aeronave
eo:Flugma ino
eu:Hegazkin
fa:
fr:A ronef
fy:Loftfart ch
ko:
io:Aeronavo
id:Pesawat
it:Aeromobile
he:
la:Aeroplanum
ms:Pesawat udara
nl:Vliegtuig
ja:
no:Luftfart y
pl:Statek powietrzny
pt:Aeronave
ru:
simple:Aircraft
sl:Zrakoplov
sr:
fi:Lentokone
sv:Flygmaskin
vi:Kh c bay
zh:
Infobox Band
band name Aphex Twin
years active 1991 present
origin Cornwall, United Kingdom
music genre IDM, Drum and Bass, Acid, Ambient, Prepared Piano, Techno
image
record label Rephlex Records br Warp Records
current members Richard David James
'''Aphex Twin''' (born '''Richard David James''', August 18, 1971, Ireland) is a UK based electronic music artist, credited with pushing forward the genres of techno, ambient, acid, and drum and bass. He has been described as "the most inventive and influential figure in contemporary electronic music" ().
Biography
Richard David James was born to Welsh parents Lorna and Derek James in 1971 in Limerick, Ireland. James spent his childhood in Cornwall, United Kingdom. As a teenager, he became a DJ and musician on the local rave scene, taking on the moniker "Aphex Twin". James formed the Rephlex Records label in 1991 with his friend Grant Wilson Claridge and released his first records on this label, as well as Mighty Force and R S Records of Belgium. After success with his early work, James relocated to London and released a slew of albums and EPs on the Warp Records label, under a bewildering set of aliases (from AFX and Polygon Window to the lesser known Gak and Power Pill).
In 1996, he began releasing more material composed on computers, and embraced a more drum and bass sound mixed with a nostalgic childhood theme and strange computer generated acid lines. The early adoption of Native Instruments' softsynthesizers predated the later popularity of using computers to make music. The late 1990s saw his music become more popular and mainstream, as he released two singles, "Come to Daddy", and "Windowlicker", which were shown on MTV and the covers of music magazines including NME.
In 2001 Aphex Twin released his most personal album yet, ''drukqs'', a 2 CD album which featured prepared piano songs under the influence of Erik Satie and John Cage. Also included were abrasive, fast, and meticulously programmed computer made songs. The level of detail and artistry was so high, that reviewers and fans complained that the music was less in the style of innovative pop music, and more about detailed beautiful and personal musical art. ''drukqs'' is perhaps Richard's most controversial album to date the album lacked the novelty found in his other albums, so reviewers guessed this album was released as a contract breaker with Warp Records a credible guess, as James' next big release came out on his own Rephlex label. It is also rumored that the album drukqs was released as it was because he had almost all of these songs on a creative jukebox that he forgot and left on a plane, and in fear of all of the tracks being leaked to the internet, its release was rushed as to avoid this.
In late 2004, rumours of James' return to a more acid techno based sound were realised with the ''Analord'' series. For these records, James used his extensive collection of Roland drum machines which he bought when they were still at bargain prices. Also he used one of the rarest, and most desirable synthesizers of his generation, the , and the notoriously difficult to program Roland MC 4 sequencer (a sequencer with a reputation for excellent timing), as well as the infamous Roland TB 303 for his trademark acid melodies.
Apart from music, Richard D. James is a talented photographer, having done his own artwork direction for many of his albums. On the "Windowlicker" single, James hid a picture of his face (created most likely with ) in the second track (commonly referred to as " Formula ", " Symbol ", or " Equation "), which can be seen in a of the track. The picture illustrates his famous toothy, evil grin.
Aphex Twin's influences
James has stated in numerous interviews that he has no musical influences other than himself. He claims to have listened rarely to songs on the radio as a child and that he is unable to read sheet music.
Conversely, James has said that he has listened to many bands and artists for inspiration and sampling (notably Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin for their breaks (used as break beats), but he has also expressed appreciation for The Fall). He signed fellow musicans and personal friends Tom "Squarepusher" Jenkinson and Mike Paradinas ( ziq) to his Rephlex record label, as well as Luke Vibert.
Other debated influences include:
! Please keep list alphabetical
808 State for whom he has done remix work.
John Cage and his prepared piano technique (itself inspired by Henry Cowell and Erik Satie independently) in the piano pieces on ''Drukqs''
Coil
Tod Dockstader An electronic musician who worked with tape, mangling sounds into music of the frequency and dynamics spectrum.
Mike Dred Acid Techno pioneer and Techno Electroacoustic hybrid pioneer (together with Peter Green) on Dred's "Machine Codes" label. James is quoted as saying that he listened to Dred Green's ''Virtual Farmer'' LP 21 times in a row when he first heard it.
Brian Eno pioneer of ambient music, and for the artwork of his ambient records.
Larry Heard (One song on ''Analord 02'' is called Laricheard, an obvious pun on the names Larry Heard and Richard, as the song resembles Mr. Fingers Larry Heard track "Amnesia".)
Kraftwerk and their electropop styles.
Kevin 'Master Reese' Saunderson
Derrick May Techno pioneer.
Joe Meek, especially ''I Heard A New World'' album of this pioneering 1960s UK producer.
Erik Satie whose melodic style was borrowed on ''Drukqs''.
Squarepusher and Luke Vibert for their extreme versions of drum and bass.
Influence of Aphex Twin on others
Fans and journalists coined the genre names IDM and drill and bass to describe Aphex Twin's novel approach to dance music. Richard's own Rephlex Records label, which he co owns with Grant Wilson Claridge prefers the term "Braindance".
These labels have proven useful for upcoming artists looking to find a genre name for their own music, influenced by Aphex Twin and Warp Records. In Aphex Twin's words on the 'Intelligent Dance Music' label: "I just think it's really funny to have terms like that. It's basically saying 'this is intelligent and everything else is stupid.' It's really nasty to everyone else's music. (laughs) It makes me laugh, things like that. I don't use names. I just say that I like something or I don't."
Aphex Twin tends to distance himself from rock pop music, yet he has still had an influence on the rock bands like Radiohead, Nine Inch Nails and Peace Burial at Sea. Aphex Twin dismissed going on tour with Radiohead: "I wouldn't play with them since I don't like them."
Aphex Twin's press
Aphex Twin press interviews are generally entertaining, eccentric, and confusing.
Aphex Twin has a reputation for lying in interviews, which he has to the Guardian newspaper. It is now been confirmed that Richard does own a tank (actually a 1950s armoured scout car, the Daimler Ferret Mark 3), a submarine bought from Russia, composing ambient techno at age 13 (contradicting most music history), having "over 100 hours" of unreleased music (including songs on his answering machine that could be wiped away by leaving a message), being able to incorporate lucid dreaming into the process of making music.
He lives in a converted bank in SE16 London, which was formerly the Bank of Cyprus and then HSBC.
It has now been confirmed by Richard s close friends that he has built his own synthesizers and samplers from scratch in his early years. Richard once built a sampler box for his degree in microelectronics, and a photograph and article of it was taken for a UK electronic music magazine Future music. Richard is experienced in electronics and electricity, and has modified and circuit bent his equipment from a young age.
He has made his own software to compose with, including algorithmic processes which automatically generate beats and melodies.
''.
Discography under Aphex Twin
Albums
''Selected Ambient Works 85 92'' (1992)
''Selected Ambient Works Volume II'' (1994)
''...I Care Because You Do'' (1995)
''Richard D. James Album'' (1996)
''Drukqs'' (2001)
''Chosen Lords'' (2006)
EPs and Singles
''Digeridoo'' (1992)
''Xylem Tube EP'' (1992)
''On On Remixes'' (1993)
''Ventolin Ventolin Remixes'' EP (1995)
''Donkey Rhubarb'' (1995)
''Girl Boy EP'' (1996)
''Come to Daddy EP'' (1997)
''Windowlicker'' (1999)
''Analord 10'' in the ''Analord'' Series (2004)
Promos and Compilations
''Words Music'' (1994) (Interview and tracks from ''Selected Ambient Works Volume II'')
''Classics'' (1995) (Compilation of early singles, rare and live tracks)
''51 13 Singles Collection'' (1996) (Australia and Japan only release)
''Cock 10 54 Cymru beats'' (drukqs promo)
''26 Mixes for Cash'' (2003), Compilation of material "remixed" for other artists (plus four original tracks)
''2 Mixes on a 12" for Cash'' (2003), a ''26 Mixes'' promo
''Falling Free, Curve Remix'' (2005), a ''26 Mixes'' LP
Discography under various aliases
'''AFX'''
''Analogue Bubblebath'' (1991)
''Analogue Bubblebath 2'' (1992)
''Analogue Bubblebath 3'' (1993)
''Analogue Bubblebath 4'' (1994)
''Analogue Bubblebath 5'' (1995 unreleased)
''Analogue Bubblebath 3.1'' (1997)
''Hangable Auto Bulb'' (1995 EP, 2005 CD)
''Hangable Auto Bulb 2'' (1995 EP, 2005 CD)
''2 Remixes By AFX'' (2001)
''Smojphace EP'' (2003)
"Mangle 11 (Circuit Bent V.I.P. Mix)" (appears on ''Rephlexions'' compilation album (2003))
''Analord'' (EP series, mostly as AFX) (2005)
''AFX LFO'' (split 12" between AFX LFO) (2005) ! http: www.warprecords.com ?mart WAP195
'''Bradley Strider'''
''Bradley's Beat'' (1991) (1995 re issue)
''Bradley's Robot'' (1993)
'''Caustic Window'''
''Joyrex J4'' (1992)
''Joyrex J5'' (1992)
''Joyrex J9'' (1993)
''CAT 023'' (unreleased, only 4 copies pressed)
''Compilation'' (1998)
'''Gak'''
''GAK'' (1994)
'''Universal Indicator''' series with Mike Dred:
Universal Indicator: ''Red'' (1992)
Universal Indicator: ''Green'' (1993)
Universal Indicator "Blue" (1992) "Yellow" (1992) are by Mike Dred
'''Polygon Window'''
''(Surfing On Sine Waves)'' (1993, re released 2001)
''(Quoth)'' (1993)
'''Power Pill'''
''Pac Man'' (1992)
'''Q Chastic'''
''Q Chastic EP'' (1992 unreleased)
'''Various others'''
''Melodies From Mars'' (1995, this is an unreleased RDJ album that was given to friends at Rephlex and Warp Records on C 90 cassettes) This release supposedly includes selections from over 200 tracks James offered video game companies to use as soundtracks.
With Squarepusher, contributed "Freeman Hardy Willis Acid" to the Warp compilation ''WAP100''.
As "Rich" of "Mike and Rich" on the album ''Mike Rich'' ("Mike" being Mike Paradinas, also known as '' ziq'')
A remixed version of ''afx237 v7'' from the album ''drukqs'' was used as the soundtrack to the short film "Rubber Johnny", directed by Chris Cunningham.
The AFX logo was featured in the video games 'Worms Armageddon' and 'Worms World Party'.
"The Diceman" Polygon Window (Track 1) Artificial Intelligence (Warp 6) Compilation released by Warp Records in 1992
''Acoustica: Alarm Will Sound Performs Aphex Twin'' (2005), performed by Alarm Will Sound
See also
Snare Rush
Rephlex Records
Warp Records
External links
at xltronic.com
at xltronic.com
at Discogs
at CL4.org
at Open Directory Project
spectrogram screenshots of spectral analyses, including that of "Windowlicker"
Aphex Twin
Aphex Twin
Aphex Twin
Category:Cornish people
Aphex Twin
Aphex Twin
! In other languages, alphabetically by language (not code) name
da:Aphex Twin
de:Aphex Twin
es:Aphex Twin
fr:Aphex Twin
hu:Aphex Twin
nl:Aphex Twin
he:
ja:
pl:Aphex Twin
ru:
simple:Aphex Twin
fi:Richard D. James
sv:Aphex Twin
(October 21, 1833, Stockholm, Sweden December 10, 1896, San Remo, Italy) was a Swedish chemist, engineer, pacifist, innovator, armaments manufacturer and the inventor of dynamite. He owned Bofors, a major armaments manufacturer, that he had redirected from its previous role as an iron and steel mill. In his last will, he used his enormous fortune to institute the Nobel Prizes. The synthetic element Nobelium was named after him.
Personal background
Alfred Nobel, a descendant of the 17th century scientist, Olaus Rudbeck (1630 1702), was the third son of Immanuel Nobel (1801 1872). Born in Stockholm, he went with his family at an early age to St. Petersburg, where his father (who had invented modern plywood) started a "torpedo" works. In 1859 this was left to the care of the second son, Ludvig Emmanuel (1831 1888), by whom it was greatly enlarged, and Alfred, returning to Sweden with his father after the bankruptcy of their family business, devoted himself to the study of explosives, and especially to the safe manufacture and use of nitroglycerine (discovered in 1847 by Ascanio Sobrero, one of his fellow students under Th ophile Jules Pelouze at the University of Torino). Several explosions were reported at their family owned factory in Heleneborg, and a disastrous one in 1864 killed Alfred's younger brother Emil and several other workers.
Less well known is that Alfred Nobel was also a playwright. His only play, ''Nemesis'', a prose tragedy in four acts about Beatrice Cenci, partly inspired by Percy Bysshe Shelley's blank verse tragedy in five acts The Cenci, was printed when he was dying, and the whole stock except for three copies was destroyed immediately after his death, being regarded as scandalous and blasphemous. The first surviving edition (bilingual Swedish Esperanto) was published in Sweden in 2003. The play has not yet (May 2003) been translated into any language other than Esperanto.
Alfred Nobel is buried in the Norra begravningsplatsen in Stockholm.
Dynamite
Nobel found that when nitroglycerin was incorporated in an absorbent inert substance like kieselguhr (diatomaceous earth) it became safer and more convenient to manipulate, and this mixture he patented in 1867 as dynamite.
He next combined nitroglycerin with another high explosive, gun cotton, and obtained a transparent, jelly like substance, which was a still more powerful explosive than dynamite. Blasting gelatin, as it was called, was patented in 1876, and was followed by a host of similar combinations, modified by the addition of potassium nitrate, wood pulp and various other substances.
Some years later Nobel produced ballistite, one of the earliest of the nitroglycerin smokeless gunpowders, containing in its latest forms about equal parts of gun cotton and nitroglycerin. This powder was a precursor of cordite, and Nobel's claim that his patent covered the latter was the occasion of vigorously contested law suits between him and the British Government in 1894 and 1895. Cordite also consists of nitroglycerin and gun cotton, but the form of the latter which its inventors wished to use was the most highly nitrated variety, which is not soluble in mixtures of ether and alcohol, whereas Nobel contemplated using a less nitrated form, which is soluble in such mixtures. The question was complicated by the fact that it is in practice impossible to prepare either of these two forms without admixture of the other eventually the courts decided against Nobel. Cordite became a mainstay munition of the British empire throughout the late 19th and early 20th century.
From the manufacture of dynamite and other explosives, and from the exploitation of the Baku oil fields, in the development of which he and his brothers, Ludvig and Robert Hjalmar (1829 1896), took a leading part, he amassed an immense fortune.
Armaments Manufacturer
A less well remembered aspect of his life was his role in setting up a major armaments manufacturer, Bofors Defence AB. He was Bofors most famous owner, and owned the company from 1894 until his death in December of 1896. He had the key role in reshaping this iron manufacturer to a modern cannon manufacturer and chemical industry.
Bofors went on to become a major supplier of howitzers, cannons and field guns to armies around the world, including the USA and many Third World dictatorships.
The Prizes
The erroneous publication in 1888 of a premature obituary of Nobel by a French newspaper, condemning his invention of dynamite, is said to have made him decide to leave a better legacy to the world after his death.
On November 27, 1895 at the Swedish Norwegian Club in Paris, Nobel signed his last will and testament and set aside the bulk of his estate to establish the Nobel Prizes, to be awarded annually without distinction of nationality. He died of a stroke on December 10, 1896 at San Remo, Italy. The amount set aside for the Nobel Prize foundation was 31 million kronor.
The first three of these prizes are for eminence in physical science, in chemistry and in medical science or physiology the fourth is for the most remarkable literary work "in an ideal direction" and the fifth is to be given to the person or society that renders the greatest service to the cause of international brother sisterhood, in the suppression or reduction of standing armies, or in the establishment or furtherance of peace congresses.
The formulation about the literary prize, "in an ideal direction" (Swedish ''i idealisk riktning''), is cryptic and has caused much consternation. For many years, the Swedish Academy interpreted "ideal" as "idealistic" (in Swedish ''idealistisk''), and used it as a pretext to not give the prize to important but less romantic authors, such as Henrik Ibsen, August Strindberg and Leo Tolstoy. This interpretation has been revised, and the prize given to, for example, Dario Fo and Jos Saramago, who definitely do not belong to the camp of literary idealism.
When reading ''Nemesis'' in its original Swedish and looking at his own philosophical and literary standpoint, it seems possible that his intention might have been rather the opposite of that first believed that the prize should be given to authors who fight for their ideals ''against'' such authorities as God, Church and State.
There was also quite a lot of room for interpretation by the bodies he had named for deciding on the physical sciences and chemistry prizes, given that he had not consulted them before making the will. In his one page testament he stipulated that the money should go to discoveries or inventions in the physical sciences and to discoveries or improvements in chemistry. He had opened the door to technological awards, but he had not left instructions on how to do the split between science and technology. Since the deciding bodies he had chosen in these domains were more concerned with science than technology it is not surprising that the prizes went to scientists and not to engineers, technicians or other inventors. In a sense the technological prizes announced recently by the World Technology Network are an indirect (and thus not funded by the Nobel foundation) continuation of the wishes of Nobel, as he set them out in his testament.
In 2001, his great grandnephew, Peter, asked the Bank of Sweden to differentiate its award to economists given "in Alfred Nobel's memory" from the five other awards. This has caused much controversy whether the prize for Economics is actually a "Nobel Prize" (see Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel).
Nobel Prize rumors
There is no Nobel Prize for mathematics. A common legend states that Nobel decided against a prize in mathematics because a woman he proposed to (or his wife, or his mistress) rejected him or cheated on him with a famous mathematician, often claimed to be G sta Mittag Leffler. There is no historical evidence to support the story, and Nobel was never married.
References
1911 Encyclop dia Britannica
Sch ck, H, and Sohlman, R., (1929). The Life of Alfred Nobel. London: William Heineman Ltd.
External links
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
Nobel, Alfred
als:Alfred Nobel
ang: lfred Nobel
ar:
bg:
zh min nan:Alfred Nobel
be:
bs:Alfred Nobel
ca:Alfred Nobel
cs:Alfred Nobel
cy:Alfred Nobel
da:Alfred Nobel
de:Alfred Nobel
et:Alfred Nobel
el:
es:Alfred Nobel
eo:Alfred NOBEL
eu:Alfred Nobel
fa:
fr:Alfred Nobel
fy:Alfred Nobel
ga:Alfred Nobel
gl:Alfred Nobel
ko:
hr:Alfred Nobel
io:Alfred Nobel
id:Alfred Nobel
it:Alfred Nobel
he:
lv:Alfr ds Nobels
lt:Alfredas Nobelis
hu:Alfred Nobel
nl:Alfred Bernhard Nobel
ja:
no:Alfred Nobel
nn:Alfred Nobel
pl:Alfred Nobel
pt:Alfred Nobel
ro:Alfred Nobel
ru: ,
sq:Alfred Nobel
scn:Alfred Nobel
simple:Alfred Nobel
sk:Alfred Nobel
sl:Alfred Nobel
sr:
su:Alfred Nobel
fi:Alfred Nobel
sv:Alfred Nobel
vi:Alfred Nobel
tr:Alfred Nobel
uk:
zh:
Infobox Celebrity
name Alexander Graham Bell
image Alexander Graham Bell.jpg
caption
birth date March 3, 1847
birth place Edinburgh, Scotland
death date August 2, 1922
death place Baddeck, Canada
occupation Scientist and inventor.
salary
networth
website
footnotes
'''Alexander Graham Bell''' (March 3, 1847 August 2, 1922) was a Canadian and Scottish American scientist and inventor. Today, he is still widely considered to be the inventor of the telephone, although this matter has become controversial, with a number of people claiming that Antonio Meucci was the 'real' inventor and others holding out for Elisha Gray, the founder of the Western Electric Manufacturing Company. In addition to his work in telecommunications technology, he was responsible for important advances in aviation and hydrofoil technology.
Biography
Born '''Alexander Bell''' in Edinburgh, he later adopted the middle name ''Graham'' out of admiration for Alexander Graham, a family friend. Many called him "the father of the Deaf." This title is somewhat ironic due to his belief in the practice of Eugenics. He hoped to one day eradicate deafness from the population.
His family was associated with the teaching of elocution: his grandfather in London, his uncle in Dublin, and his father, Alexander Melville Bell, in Edinburgh, were all professed elocutionists. The latter has published a variety of works on the subject, several of which are well known, especially his treatise on Visible Speech, which appeared in Edinburgh in 1868. In this he explains his method of instructing deaf mutes, by means of their eyesight, how to articulate words, and also how to read what other persons are saying by the motions of their lips.
Alexander Graham Bell was educated at the Royal High School of Edinburgh, from which he graduated at the age of 13. At the age of 16 he secured a position as a pupil teacher of elocution and music in Weston House Academy, at Elgin, Moray, Scotland. The next year he spent at the University of Edinburgh. He was graduated from University College London.
From 1866 to 1867, he was an instructor at Somersetshire College at Bath, Somerset, England.
While still in Scotland he is said to have turned his attention to the science of acoustics, with a view to ameliorate the deafness of his mother.
In 1870, at the age of 23, he emigrated with his family to Canada where they settled at Brantford. Before he left Scotland, Bell had turned his attention to telephony, and in Canada he continued an interest in communication machines. He designed a piano which could transmit its music to a distance by means of electricity. In 1873, he accompanied his father to Montreal, Canada, where he was employed in teaching the system of visible speech. The elder Bell was invited to introduce the system into a large day school for mutes at Boston, but he declined the post in favor of his son, who became Professor of Vocal Physiology and Elocution at Boston University's School of Oratory.
At Boston University he continued his research in the same field, and endeavored to produce a telephone which would not only send musical notes, but articulate speech. With financing from his American father in law, on March 7, 1876, the U.S. Patent Office granted him Patent Number 174,465 covering "the method of, and apparatus for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically ... by causing electrical undulations, similar in form to the vibrations of the air accompanying the said vocal or other sound", the telephone.
After obtaining the patent for the telephone, Bell continued his many experiments in communication, which culminated in the invention of the photophone transmission of sound on a beam of light a precursor of today's optical fiber systems. He also worked in medical research and invented techniques for teaching speech to the deaf. The range of Bell's inventive genius is represented only in part by the eighteen patents granted in his name alone and the twelve he shared with his collaborators. These included fourteen for the telephone and telegraph, four for the photophone, one for the phonograph, five for aerial vehicles, four for hydroairplanes, and two for a selenium cell.
Bell had many great ideas that are now real inventions. During his Volta Laboratory period, Bell and his associates considered impressing a magnetic field on a record, as a means of reproducing sound. Although the trio briefly experimented with the concept, they were unable to develop a workable prototype. They abandoned the idea, never realizing they had glimpsed a basic principle which would one day find its application in the tape recorder, the computer, and the CD ROM.
Bell's own home used a primitive form of air conditioning, in which fans blew currents of air across great blocks of ice. He also anticipated modern concerns with fuel shortages and industrial pollution. Methane gas, he reasoned, could be produced from the waste of farms and factories. At his Canadian estate in Beinn Bhreagh, Nova Scotia, he experimented with composting toilets and devices to capture water from the atmosphere. In a magazine interview published shortly before his death, he reflected on the possibility of using solar panels to heat houses.
In 1882, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. In 1888, he was one of the founding members of the National Geographic Society and became its second president. He was the recipient of many honors. The French Government conferred on him the decoration of the L gion d'honneur (Legion of Honor), the Acad mie fran aise bestowed on him the Volta Prize of 50,000 francs, the Royal Society of Arts in London awarded him the Albert medal in 1902, and the University of W rzburg, Bavaria, granted him a Ph.D. He was awarded the AIEE's Edison Medal in 1914 for "For meritorious achievement in the invention of the telephone."
Bell married Mabel Hubbard, who was one of his pupils at Boston University, as well as a deaf mute, on July 11, 1877. His invention of the telephone was actually a device he was trying to create that would allow him to communicate with his wife and his deaf mother. He died at Beinn Bhreagh, located on Nova Scotia's Cape Breton Island near the village of Baddeck, in 1922 and is buried alongside his wife atop Beinn Bhreagh mountain overlooking Bras d'Or Lake. He was survived by two of their four children.
Bell was listed among the 100 Greatest Britons, the 100 Greatest Americans and in the top ten Greatest Canadians, the only person to be on more than one list.
Bell and decibel
The ''bel'' (B) is a unit of measurement invented by Bell Labs and named after Bell. The bel was too large for everyday use, so the decibel (dB), equal to 0.1 B, became more commonly used.
The dB is commonly used as a unit for measuring sound intensity.
The photophone
Another of Bell's inventions was the photophone, a device enabling the transmission of sound over a beam of light, which he developed together with Charles Sumner Tainter. The device employed light sensitive cells of crystalline selenium, which has the property that its electrical resistance varies inversely with the illumination (i.e., the resistance is higher when the material is in the dark, and lower when it is lighted). The basic principle was to modulate a beam of light directed at a receiver made of crystalline selenium, to which a telephone was attached. The modulation was done either by means of a vibrating mirror, or a rotating disk periodically obscuring the light beam.
This idea was by no means new. Selenium had been discovered by J ns Jakob Berzelius in 1817, and the peculiar properties of crystalline or granulate selenium were discovered by Willoughby Smith in 1873. In 1878, one writer with the initials J.F.W. from Kew described such an arrangement in ''Nature'' in a column appearing on June 13, asking the readers whether any experiments in that direction had already been done. In his paper on the photophone, Bell credited one A. C. Browne of London with the independent discovery in 1878the same year Bell became aware of the idea. Bell and Tainter, however, were apparently the first to perform a successful experiment, by no means any easy task, as they even had to produce the selenium cells with the desired resistance characteristics themselves.
In one experiment in Washington, D.C. the sender and the receiver were placed on different buildings some 700 feet (213 metres) apart. The sender consisted of a mirror directing sunlight onto the mouthpiece, where the light beam was modulated by a vibrating mirror, focused by a lens and directed at the receiver, which was simply a parabolic reflector with the selenium cells in the focus and the telephone attached. With this setup, Bell and Tainter succeeded to communicate clearly.
The photophone was patented on December 18 1880, but the quality of communication remained poor and the research was not pursued by Bell.
Metal detector
Bell is also credited with the invention of the metal detector in 1881. The device was hurriedly put together in an attempt to find the bullet in the body of U.S. President James Garfield. The metal detector worked, but didn't find the bullet because the metal bedframe the President was lying on confused the instrument. Bell gave a full account of his experiments in a paper read before the American Association for the Advancement of Science in August 1882. Though unsuccessful in its first incarnation, this achievement would eventually change the nature of physical security.
Experimental aircraft
Bell was also interested in aircraft and was a supporter of aerospace engineering research through the Aerial Experiment Association. The Association was officially formed at Baddeck, Nova Scotia in October 1907 at the suggestion of Mrs. Mabel Bell and with her financial support. It was headed by the inventor himself. The founding members were four young men, American Glenn H. Curtiss, a motorcycle manufacturer who would later be awarded the Scientific American Trophy for the first official one kilometre flight in the Western hemisphere and later be world renowned as an airplane manufacturer Frederick W. "Casey" Baldwin, the first Canadian and first British subject to pilot a public flight in Hammondsport, New York J.A.D. McCurdy and Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge, an official observer of the U.S. government. One of the project's inventions, the aileron, is a standard component of aircraft today. (Note that the aileron was also invented independently by Robert Esnault Pelterie.)
In 1909, Bell's ''Silver Dart'' made the first controlled powered flight in Canada. However, a series of Canadian flights failed to interest the Canadian military in developing the airplane.
The hydrofoil
The March 1906 ''Scientific American'' article by American hydrofoil pioneer William E. Meacham explained the basic principle of hydrofoils. Bell considered the invention of the hydroplane as a very significant achievement. Based on information gained from that article he began to sketch concepts of what is now called a hydrofoil boat.
Bell and Casey Baldwin began hydrofoil experimentation in the summer of 1908 as a possible aid to airplane takeoff from water. Baldwin studied the work of the Italian inventor Enrico Forlanini and began testing models. This led him and Bell to the development of practical hydrofoil watercraft.
During his world tour of 19101911 Bell and Baldwin met with Forlanini in Italy. They had rides in the Forlanini hydrofoil boat over Lake Maggiore. Baldwin described it as being as smooth as flying. On returning to Baddeck a number of designs were tried culminating in the HD 4, using Renault engines. A top speed of 54 miles per hour was achieved, with rapid acceleration, good stability and steering, and the ability to take waves without difficulty.
Bell's report to the navy permitted him to obtain two 350 horsepower (260 kW) engines in July 1919. On September 9 1919 the HD 4 set a world's marine speed record of 70.86 miles per hour. This record stood for ten years.
Eugenics
Along with many very prominent thinkers and scientists of the time, Bell was connected with the eugenics movement in the United States. From 1912 until 1918 he was the chairman of the board of scientific advisors to the Eugenics Record Office associated with Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, and regularly attended meetings. In 1921 he was the honorary president of the Second International Congress of Eugenics held under the auspices of the American Museum of Natural History in New York. Organizations such as these advocated passing laws (with success in some states) that established the compulsory sterilization of people deemed to be, as Bell called them, a "defective variety of the human race".
Much of his thoughts about people he considered defective centered on the deaf because of his long contact with them in relation to his work in deaf education. In addition to advocating sterilization of the deaf, Bell wished to prohibit deaf teachers from being allowed to teach in schools for the deaf, he worked to outlaw the marriage of deaf individuals to one another, and he was an ardent supporter of oralism over manualism. His avowed goal was to eradicate the language and culture of the deaf so as to force them to integrate into the hearing culture for their own long term benefit and for the benefit of society at large. Although this attitude is widely seen as paternalistic and arrogant today, it was accepted in that era.
Although he supported what many would consider harsh and inhumane policies today, he was not unkind to deaf individuals who proved his theories of oralism. He was a personal and longtime friend of Helen Keller, and his wife Mabel was deaf, though none of their children were. Bell was well known as a kindly father and loving family man who took great pleasure playing with his many grandchildren.
Tribute
In the early 1970s, UK Rock Group The Sweet recorded a tribute to Bell and the telephone, suitably titled "Alexander Graham Bell". The song tells a fictional account of the invention, in which Bell devises the telephone so he can talk to his girlfriend who lives on the other side of the United States from him. The song reached the top 40 in the UK and went on to sell over one million recordings world wide.
External links
before the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston on August 27, 1880, presenting the photophone. Very clear description. Published as "On the Production and Reproduction of Sound by Light" in the ''American Journal of Sciences'', Third Series, vol. '''XX''', 118, October 1880, pp. 305 324 and as "Selenium and the Photophone" in ''Nature'', September 1880.
, patent US174465 for the telephone.
Online version at the Library of Congress comprises a selection of 4,695 items (totaling about 51,500 images) containing correspondence, scientific notebooks, journals, blueprints, articles, and photographs documenting Bell invention of the telephone and his involvement in the first telephone company, his family life, his interest in the education of the deaf, and his aeronautical and other scientific research.
! Categorization
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
Bell, Alexander Graham
! Localization
ar:
bs:Alexander Graham Bell
ca:Alexander Graham Bell
cs:Alexander Graham Bell
da:Alexander Graham Bell
de:Alexander Graham Bell
es:Alexander Graham Bell
eo:Alexander Graham BELL
fr:Alexandre Graham Bell
fy:Alexander Graham Bell
hr:Alexander Graham Bell
id:Alexander Graham Bell
it:Alexander Graham Bell
he:
lt:Aleksandras Grehemas Belas
mr:
nl:Alexander Graham Bell
ja:
ko:
no:Alexander Graham Bell
pl:Alexander Graham Bell
pt:Alexander Graham Bell
ro:Alexander Graham Bell
ru: ,
sco:Alexander Graham Bell
sh:Alexander Graham Bell
simple:Alexander Graham Bell
sk:Alexander Graham Bell
sr:
fi:Alexander Graham Bell
sv:Alexander Graham Bell
sw:Alexander Graham Bell
ta:
th:
tr:Alexander Graham Bell
uk:
zh:
'''''Amhr n na bhFiann'''''sup1 sup is the national anthem of the Republic of Ireland. Although usually sung in the Irish language, a translation of the original, it is also known by the English language title, '''''A Soldier's Song''''', as well as '''The National Anthem of Ireland''' ('''Amhr n N isi nta na h ireann'''). The lyrics of the song are by Peadar Kearney and the music by both Kearney and Patrick Heeney. It was composed in 1907 and was first published in ''Irish Freedom'' in 1912. The Irish language version of the original was the work of Bulmer Hobson.
The song is regarded by many nationalists as the national anthem of the whole of Ireland, and it is therefore sung, for example, at Gaelic Athletic Association matches held anywhere on the island. Unionists, however, reject this use of ''Amhr n na bhFiann'', and at international games played by the all Ireland Irish Rugby Football Union team the song ''Ireland's Call'' is sung instead of, or (in the Republic of Ireland) as well as, ''Amhr n na bhFiann''.
History
''Amhr n na bhFiann'' was relatively unknown until it was sung by rebels in the General Post Office (GPO) during the Easter Rising of 1916, and afterwards in British internment camps. The song became the official state anthem in 1926 when it replaced the unofficial anthem, ''God Save Ireland''.
''God Save the King'' was the official anthem of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland until the independent Irish Free State was established in 1922. The continued use of ''God Save the King'' by some Irish people caused embarrassment to the new Irish state and, on one famous occasion, Governor General James McNeill refused to attend a public function in Trinity College when he discovered that the university intended playing the anthem during his visit. Even after the adoption of ''Amhr n na bhFiann'' as the official anthem of the Irish Free State in July 1926, a minority continued to sing the British anthem, and to pray for the King and Queen in religious ceremonies, for a number of years.
In 1934, the Irish state acquired the copyright of the song for the sum of 1,200.
Controversy also surrounds the change in the wording of ''Amhr n na bhFiann'' over the years. In the original translation, the first line read as ''Sinne Laochra Gaedheal'' (literally "we the heroes of Ireland"). This has since been replaced by ''Sinne Fianna F il'', which to some people is evidence that the anthem has been hijacked by the Fianna F il party.
In recent years, a number of Irish newspapers and columnists have proposed replacing ''Amhr n na bhFiann'' with a new national anthem, arguing that the current wording is excessively militant and anti British. Others have argued that the melody is difficult for bands to play. Problems have sometimes been witnessed at international sporting events, where either the entire song (not just the chorus that constitutes the anthem) has been played (as occurred, for example, at the Los Angeles Olympics) or the right part has been played but at the wrong speed, as occurred at the Sydney Olympics in 2000.
Some have proposed that the anthem be replaced with the Irish Rugby Football Union's song, ''Ireland's Call''. The suggestion has also been made that, as occurred in Germany after World War II, the government might change the words of the anthem while keeping the original melody.
Lyrics
The Irish national anthem consists of the chorus only of ''Amhr n na bhFiann'', and is almost always sung in Irish. The first two lines of the anthem and the last two, played together, form the Irish ''Presidential Salute'', which is played when the President of Ireland attends official events. The chorus of ''Amhr n na bhFiann'', as used for the anthem, is given below.
Irish version
:Sinne Fianna F il
:At faoi gheall ag irinn,
:Bu on d r slua
:Thar toinn do r inig chughainn,
:Faoi mh id bheith saor.
:Sean t r r sinsear feasta
:N fh gfar faoin tior n n faoin tr ill
:Anocht a th am sa bhearna baoil,
:Le gean ar Ghaeil chun b is n saoil
:Le gunna scr ach faoi l mhach na bpil ar
:Seo libh canaig Amhr n na bhFiann.
Phonetic version
:shin na fee in na fall
:a thaw fay yeol egg erin
:bween dar slew
:harr thin the raw ne gooin
:Fway vawid veh sair
:shawn tier awr shinshir fasta
:nee owg fur fay teer awn naw feign trawl
:an nocht a hame saw varna vwail
:lay gown owr gwale cunn boss no sale
:le gunna sh rake fay law buck naw bell air
:shull liv con ig arawn naveen
English version
:Soldiers are we
:whose lives are pledged to Ireland
:Some have come
:from a land beyond the wave.
:Sworn to be free,
:No more our ancient sireland
:Shall shelter the despot or the slave.
:Tonight we man the ''bearna baoil'' sup2 sup
:In Erin's cause, come woe or weal
:'Mid cannon's roar and rifles' peal,
:We'll chant a soldier's song.
Complete Lyrics
The Following is the full lyrics of Amhr n na bhFiann, in Irish and English.
Irish lyrics
:Seo dhibh a ch irde duan glaigh,
:Cathr imeach briomhar ceolmhar,
: r dtinte cn mh go buacach t id,
:'S an sp ir go min r altogach
:Is fonnmhar faobhrach sinn chun gleo
:'S go ti nmhar gl roimh th ocht do'n l
:F chi nas chaomh na hoiche ar seol:
:Seo libh cana dh Amhr n na bhFiann.
:Curf :
:Sinne Fianna F il
:A t f gheall ag irinn,
:buion d r slua
:Thar toinn do r inig chugainn,
:F mh id bheith saor.
:Sean t r r sinsir feasta
:N fhagfar f 'n tior n n f 'n tr il
:Anocht a th am sa bhearna bhaoil,
:Le gean ar Ghaeil chun b is n saoil
:Le guna screach f l mhach na bpil ar
:Seo libh cana dh Amhr n na bhFiann.
:Cois b nta r idhe, ar rdaibh sl ibhe,
:Ba bhuachach r sinsir romhainn,
:Ag l mhach go tr an f 'n s r bhrat s in
:T thuas sa ghaoith go seolta
:Ba dh chas riamh d' r gcine ch idh
:Gan iomp il siar imirt ir,
:'S ag si l mar iad i gcoinne n mhad
:Seo libh, cana dh Amhr n na bhFiann.
:Curf
:A bhu on n ch fann d'fhuil Ghaeil is Gall,
:Sin breacadh lae na saoirse,
:Ta sc imhle 's scanradh i gcro the namhad,
:Roimh ranna laochra r dtire.
: r dtinte is tr ith gan spr ach anois,
:Sin luisne ghl san sp ir anoir,
:'S an b obha i raon na bpil ar agaibh:
:Seo libh, cana dh Amhr n na bhFiann.
:Curf
English lyrics
:We'll sing a song, a soldier's song,
:With cheering rousing chorus,
:As round our blazing fires we throng,
:The starry heavens o'er us
:Impatient for the coming fight,
:And as we wait the morning's light,
:Here in the silence of the night,
:We'll chant a soldier's song.
:Chorus:
:Soldiers are we
:whose lives are pledged to Ireland
:Some have come
:from a land beyond the wave.
:Sworn to be free,
:No more our ancient sire land
:Shall shelter the despot or the slave.
:Tonight we man the gap of danger
:In Erin's cause, come woe or weal
:'Mid cannons' roar and rifles peal,
:We'll chant a soldier's song.
:In valley green, on towering crag,
:Our fathers fought before us,
:And conquered 'neath the same old flag
:That's proudly floating o'er us.
:We're children of a fighting race,
:That never yet has known disgrace,
:And as we march, the foe to face,
:We'll chant a soldier's song.
:Chorus
:Sons of the Gael! Men of the Pale!
:The long watched day is breaking
:The serried ranks of Inisfail
:Shall set the Tyrant quaking.
:Our camp fires now are burning low
:See in the east a silv'ry glow,
:Out yonder waits the Saxon foe,
:So chant a soldier's song.
:Chorus
Footnote
''Amhr n na bhFiann'' is pronounced "ow rawn na veean"
Meaning "gap of danger" and pronounced "vair na vwail" ''(See article on Battle of New Ross for explanation of origin)
External links
Text of National Anthem published on Department of Taoiseach website
Complete Lyrics
Media files
7.6 KB simple sequence
1 MB anthem played by the Army Band
3.9 MB audio visual as used on RTE television in the 1980s 90s
Category:National anthems
Category:Republic of Ireland
Category:Irish songs
cs:Irsk hymna
cy:Amhr n na bhFiann
de:Nationalhymne der Republik Irland
es:Amhr n na bhFiann
fr:Amhr n na bhFiann
ga:Amhr n na bhFiann
it:Amhr n na bhFiann
he:
hu: r himnusz
nl:Amhr n na bhFiann
ja:
nn:Amhr n na bhFiann
pl:Hymn Irlandii
pt:Hino nacional da Irlanda
ru:
sr:
fi:Amhr n na bhFiann
sv:Amhr n na bhFiann
tr: rlanda Ulusal Mar
, between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean.
'''Anatolia''' (Turkish: "Anadolu",Greek: "A " '' natol '' or ''Anatol a'') is a region of Southwest Asia which corresponds today to the Asian portion of Turkey, as opposed to the European portion, Rumelia. It means "rising of the sun" or "East". The Turkish word '''Anadolu''' derives from the original Greek version. It also often called by the Latin name of '''Asia Minor'''.
Because of its strategic location at the intersection of Asia and Europe, Anatolia has been a cradle for several civilizations since prehistoric ages, with Neolithic settlements such as atalh y k (Pottery Neolithic), ay n (Pre Pottery Neolithic A to pottery Neolithic), Nevali Cori (Pre Pottery Neolithic B), Hacilar (Pottery Neolithic), G bekli Tepe (Pre Pottery Neolithic A) and Mersin. The settlement of Troy starts in the Neolithic and continues forward into the Iron Age.
Major civilizations and peoples that have settled in or conquered Anatolia include the Colchians, Hattians, Luwians, Hittites, Phrygians, Cimmerians, Lydians, Persians, Celts, Tabals, Meshechs, Greeks, Pelasgians, Armenians, Romans, Goths, Kurds, Byzantines, Seljuk Turks, and Ottomans. These peoples belonged to many varied ethnic and linguistic traditions. Through recorded history, Anatolians have spoken both Indo European and Semitic languages, as well as many languages of uncertain affiliation. In fact, given the antiquity of the Indo European Hittite and Luwian languages, some scholars have proposed Anatolia as the hypothetical center from which the Indo European languages have radiated. Other authors have proposed an Anatolian origin for the Etruscans of ancient Italy.
! Image with unknown copyright status removed:
Today the inhabitants of Anatolia are mostly native speakers of the Turkish language, which was introduced with the conquest of Anatolia by Turkic peoples and the rise of the Seljuk Empire in the 11th century. However, Anatolia remained multi ethnic until the early 20th century (see Rise of Nationalism under the Ottoman Empire). The Turks in Thrace were forced to leave their homes and settle in Anatolia during the Balkan Wars. The last population exchange, as result of the Treaty of Lausanne, between Turkey and Greece eliminated the majority of Turks in Greece and Greeks in Turkey. A significant Kurdish ethnic and linguistic minority exists in the south eastern regions, while Armenians have a waning presence in the northeast and in cities.
States of Anatolia
Anatolia has been the center of many great states throughout history. The first known state was built by Hittites.
style "border:1px solid 8888aa background color: f7f8ff padding:2px font size:85 " align center
colspan "3" rowspan "1" style "text align: center background color: rgb(204, 153, 51) " States that existed over the Anatolia
Old Kingdom
Ionia
Byzantine Empire
New Kingdom
Hellenistic Greece
Nicaean Empire
Neo Hittite
Pergamon
Ottoman Empire
Urartu
Persian Empire
Roman Greece
Republic of Turkey
Ottoman Rule of Asia Minor after 1885
After 1885, with the governing reforms of Tanzimat, the control of the Ottoman land in Asia Minor divided into 15 vilayets, one sanjak and one mutersaflik of the vilayet of Constantinople (both being on the asiatic side of the Bosporus).
Every vilayet was further divided in a number of sanjaks.
More specifically the political division of Asia Minor in 1915 was as follows
Vilayet of Izmir divided in the sanjaks of Manisa, Izmir, Aydin, Denizli, Mentese
Independent vilayet of the Dardanelles
Vilayet of Bursa divided in the sanjaks of Balikesir, Bursa, Erdogrul, Kutahya, Afyon
Vilayet of Konya divided in the sanjaks of Burdur, Hamid abad, Atalya, Konya, Nigde
Vilayet of Kastamonu divided in the sanjaks of Bolu, Cankiri, Kastamonu, Sinop
Vilayet of Ankara divided in the sanjaks of Ankara, Kirsehir, Yozgat, Kayseri
Vilayet of Adana, divided in the sanjaks of Icel(Mersin), Adana, Hozan, Jebel i Bereket
Vilayet of Sivas divided in the sanjaks of Sivas, Tokat, Amasya, Karahisar Sarki
Vilayet of Trabzon divided in the sanjaks of Samsun, Trabzon, Argiropolis, Lazistan
Vilayet of Erzurum
Vilayet of Bitlis divided in the sanjaks of Mus, Ghen, Siirt
Vilayet of Van divided in the sanjaks of Van, Hakkari
Vilayet of Mosul divided in the sanjaks of Mosul, Sehrizan, Suleymanih
Vilayet of Mamure ul Azil divided in the sanjak of Diyarbakir and the mutersaflik of Zor
Vilayet of Halep divided in the sanjaks of Halep, Urfa, Maras
Also the
Independent mutersaflik of Izmit and
the sanjak of Uskudar
Ethnic distribution in Asia Minor in the early 20th century (before the Treaty of Lausanne)
Based on French census files of 1915 the total population of Asia Minor (not including Eastern Thrace, the vilayets of the orient the city of Constantinople) was 10,372,411 persons of all nationalities and religions.
More specifically the distribution of differerent ethnic groups as per Vilayet and Sanjak is as follows
class "wikitable"
style "background color: C9C9C9"
style "background color: E9E9E9"
! Sanjak or Vilayet !! Greeks !! Turks !! Armenians !! Rest !! Total
'''Sanjak of Uskudar''' 74,457 124,281 35,560 24,192 258,490
'''Mutersaflik of Izmit''' 73,134 116,949 48,635 3,615 242,333
style "background color: E9E9E9"
'''Vilayet of the Dardanelles''' 32,830 138,902 2,336 177,894
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Izmir''':
Sanjak of Izmir 449,044 219,494 11,395 754,046
Sanjak of Manisa 83,625 247,778 3,960 337,925
Sanjak of Aydin 54,633 162,554 634 219,959
Sanjak of Mentese 27,798 197,317 430 205,457
Sanjak of Denizli 7,710 113,700 0 142,142
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Bursa''':
Sanjak of Bursa 82,503 215,492 50,809 353,976
Sanjak of Balikesir 150,946 194,391 17,882 239,236
Sanjak of Kutahya 16,800 244,698 5,040 250,938
Sanjak of Afyon 1,200 291,317 8,800 317,017
Sanjak of Erdogrul (Bilecig) 26,970 246,851 7,495 408,957
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Konya''':
Sanjak of Konya 8,589 294,191 6,900 325,180
Sanjak of Atalya 10,253 196,087 489 207,258
Sanjak of Burdur 2,565 149,968 987 153,565
Sanjak of Nigde 55,518 174,140 753 230,490
Sanjak of Hamid Abad (Isparta) 10,096 174,337 600 185,056
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Ankara''':
Sanjak of Ankara 3,154 265,283 14,019 283,043
Sanjak of Kirsehir 717 116,999 346 118,062
Sanjak of Kayseri 23,201 157,331 44,985 226,912
Sanjak of Yozgat 18,801 128,787 39,448 194,281
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Kastamonu''':
Sanjak of Kastamonu 10,783 334,337 1,424 346,552
Sanjak of Sinop 7,986 319,224 507 324,738
Sanjak of Kankiri 1,143 165,407 960 167,510
Sanjak of Bolu 5,007 119,467 314 129,846
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Sivas''':
Sanjak of Sivas 7,702 451,214 64,070 522,986
Sanjak of Amasya 36,739 198,000 50,600 285,339
Sanjak of Karahisar Sarki 27,761 38,500 18,046 84,307
Sanjak of Tokat 27,174 151,800 37,919 216,893
style "background color: E9E9E9"
colspan "7" '''Vilayet of Trebzon''':
Sanjak of Trabzon 154,774 404,656 26,321 583,751
Sanjak of Samsun (Djanik) 136,087 233,454 22,585 392,126
Sanjak of Lazistan 2,924 231,885 0 234,809
Sanjak of Argiropolis (Gumus Haneh) 59,748 87,871 1,718 149,337
See also
Hayastan (Greater Armenia)
Cilicia (Lesser Armenia)
Western Armenia (Ottoman Armenia)
Kurdistan
Lazistan
Pontus
Ajaria
List of ethnic groups
Levant
Ancient Near East
Middle East
History of Ottoman Armenia
Category:Middle East
Category:Near East
ar:
ast:Anatolia
bg:
ca:Anat lia
cs:Mal Asie
da:Anatolien
de:Kleinasien
et:Anatoolia
el:
es:Anatolia
eo:Malgrand Azio
fa:
fr:Anatolie
gl:Anatolia
ko:
hr:Anatolija
id:Anatolia
is:Anat l a
it:Anatolia
he:
ku:Anatoliya
la:Asia Minor
lb:Anatolien
nl:Anatoli
nds:Anatolien
ja:
ka:
no:Anatolia
pl:Anatolia (Turcja)
pt:Anat lia
ru:
simple:Asia Minor
sl:Anatolija
fi:Anatolia
sv:Anatolien
th:
tr:Anadolu
uk:
zh:
! Please keep this article focused on the company. Try to refrain from turning this into an article on their products or innovations, except when relevant to the manufacturers. Although not terribly long, any reduction in length that does not hurt content is nice.
'''Apple Computer, Inc. '''( and ) is an American computer technology company. Its headquarters are located at 1 Infinite Loop, Cupertino, California, part of Silicon Valley. Apple was a major player in the personal computer revolution in the 1970s.
The Apple II microcomputer, introduced in 1977, was a hit with home users. In 1983, Apple introduced the first commercial personal computer to use a graphical user interface (GUI), the Lisa. In 1984, Apple introduced the revolutionary Macintosh. The Macintosh (commonly called the "Mac") was the first successful commercial implementation of a GUI, which is now used in all major computers.
Apple is known for its innovative, well designed hardware and software, such as the iPod and the iMac, as well as the well known iTunes application (part of the iLife suite) and Mac OS X, its current operating system.
History
1976 to 1980 The founding of Apple
Apple Computer was founded in Los Gatos, California on April 1, 1976 by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak and Ronald Wayne, to sell the Apple I personal computer kit at 666.66. They were hand built in Jobs' parents' garage, and the Apple I was first shown to the public at the Homebrew Computer Club.
Jobs and Wozniak, ("the two Steves") had been friends since 1971. Jobs managed to interest Wozniak in assembling a personal computer and selling it. Jobs approached a local computer store, The Byte Shop, who, after Jobs' famous persuasion, ordered fifty units and paid 500 for each unit. Jobs then ordered components from Cramer Electronics, a national electronic parts distributor. Using a variety of methods, including borrowing space from friends and family and selling various items including a Volkswagen Type 2 bus, Jobs managed to secure the parts needed while Wozniak and another friend, Ronald Wayne, assembled the Apple I. They were delivered in June, and paid for on delivery. Eventually 200 Apple I computers were built.
Note that the original Apple I was actually a motherboard, it was not a full computer as we know it today.
The Apple II was introduced on April 16, 1977 at the first West Coast Computer Faire. It was popular with home users and was occasionally sold to business users, particularly after the release of the first spreadsheet for any computer called VisiCalc. (See the timeline for dates of Apple II family model releasesthe 1977 Apple II and its younger siblings, the II Plus, IIe, IIc and IIGS.) But it was a mild success for the small computer company.
By now, Jobs and his partners had a staff of computer designers and a production line. The Apple II was succeeded by the Apple III in May 1980 as the company struggled to compete against IBM and Microsoft in the lucrative business and corporate computing market. The designers of the Apple III were forced to comply with Jobs' request to omit the cooling fan, and this ultimately resulted in thousands of recalled units due to overheating. An updated version was introduced in 1983 but it was also a failure due to bad press and discouraged buyers. Nevertheless, the principals of the company persevered with further innovations and marketing.
Jobs and several other Apple employees including Jef Raskin visited Xerox PARC in December 1979, to see the Alto computer. Xerox granted Apple engineers three days of access to the PARC facilities in return for selling them one million dollars in pre IPO Apple stock (approximately 18 million net).
1981 to 1989 Lisa and Macintosh
, set in a dystopian future modeled after the Orwellian novel Nineteen Eighty Four.
In the early 1980s, IBM and Microsoft continued to gain market share at Apple's expense in the personal computer industry. Using a fundamentally different business model, IBM marketed an open hardware standard created with the IBM PC, which was bundled with Microsoft's MS DOS (MicroSoft Disk Operating System). In 1983, Apple introduced the first personal computer to be sold to the public with a graphical user interface (GUI), named the Lisa. Using a GUI, the user communicates with the computer by interacting with icons onscreen that resemble real world items (folders, documents, images). However, the Lisa was a commercial failure as a result of its high price tag ( 9995) and limited software titles.
After the Lisa, Apple began work on a similar but less expensive computer to be called the Macintosh. It was launched in 1984 with the now famous Super Bowl advertisement based on George Orwell's novel ''1984''. It was an immediate success, particularly in the world of graphic and communications design, where its GUI (which was to become the industry standard) and ability to handle large graphic files surpassed anything else on the market. The Macintosh also spawned the concept of Mac evangelism among users, which was pioneered by Apple employee and later Apple Fellow, Guy Kawasaki.
In anticipation of the Macintosh launch, Bill Gates, co founder and chairman of Microsoft, was given several Macintosh prototypes in 1983 to develop software for the "Mac". In 1985, Microsoft launched Microsoft Windows, with its own GUI for IBM PCs using many of the elements of the Macintosh OS.
An internal power struggle developed between Jobs and new CEO John Sculley in 1985. Apple's board of directors sided with Sculley, and Jobs was asked to resign from the company. Jobs then founded NeXT Inc., a computer company that built machines with futuristic designs and ran the UNIX derived NeXTstep operating system. Although powerful, NeXT computers never caught on with buyers, due in part to their high purchase price.
1990 to 1993 PowerBook and decline
Having learned several painful lessons after introducing the bulky Macintosh Portable in 1989, Apple turned to industrial designers and adopted a product strategy based in three portable devices. One portable was built by Sony, which had a strong reputation for designing small, durable and functional electronics devices. Sony took the specs of the Mac Portable, put in a smaller two hour battery, a much smaller (physically) twenty megabyte hard drive and a smaller nine inch passive matrix screen.
Called the PowerBook 100, this landmark product was introduced in 1991 and established the modern form and ergonomic layout of the laptop computer. This solidified Apple's reputation as a quality manufacturer, both of desktop and now portable machines. The success of the PowerBook and several other Apple products during this period led to increasing revenue. The magazine ''MacAddict'' named the period between 1989 to 1991 the "first golden age" of the Macintosh.
This golden age was not to last. The introduction of Microsoft Windows presented an interface that many people thought was close enough to the Macintosh in terms of ease of use and overall look and feel. Apple thought that Windows was ''too'' close, and sued Microsoft for theft of intellectual property.
At about the same time, Apple branched out into consumer electronics. One example of this product diversification was the Apple QuickTake digital camera (which never caught on). A more famous example was the Newton, an early PDA that was introduced in 1993. Though it failed commercially, it defined and launched the new category of computing and was a forerunner and inspiration of devices such as BlackBerry, Palm Pilot and its descendants PocketPCs.
During the 1990s, Apple greatly expanded its computer lineup as well. It offered a multitude of different models, yet it failed to adequately explain to the public why it should choose one model over another.
The costs involved in making such a wide variety of products, coupled with some highly publicized product recalls and the growing popularity of Microsoft Windows, all lead to the near bankruptcy of Apple in the mid to late 1990s.
1994 to 1997 Attempts at reinvention
By the mid 1990s, Apple realized that it had to reinvent the Macintosh in order to stay competitive in the computer world. The needs of both computer users and computer programs were becoming, for a variety of technical reasons, harder for the existing hardware and operating system to address.
In 1994, Apple surprised its loyalists by allying with its long time competitor IBM and Motorola in the so called AIM alliance. This was a bid to create a new computing platform (the PowerPC Reference Platform or PReP) which would use IBM and Motorola hardware coupled with Apple's software. The AIM alliance hoped that PReP's performance and Apple's software would leave the PC far behind, thus countering Microsoft, which had become Apple's chief competitor.
Towards this end, Apple tried to recruit other companies that would build PReP compliant computers. Apple hoped to expand the Mac OS market share by licensing the operating system to these other companies, like Microsoft had promoted DOS and Windows by licensing them to external manufacturers. Only a few companies notably Power Computing and UMAX agreed to produce these computers. But eventually the licensing program was suspended.
As the first step toward launching the PReP platform, Apple started the Power Macintosh line in 1994, using IBM's PowerPC processor. This processor utilized a RISC architecture, which differed substantially from the Motorola 68k series that had been used by all previous Macs. Apple's OS's were rewritten so that most software for the older Macs could run on the PowerPC series (in emulation).
Also throughout the mid to late 1990s, Apple tried to improve its operating system's multitasking and memory management. After first attempting to modify its existing code, Apple realized that it would be better to start with an entirely new operating system and then modify it to fit the Macintosh interface. Apple did some preliminary work with IBM towards this goal with the Taligent project, but that project never produced a replacement operating system. They then investigated using Be's BeOS, NeXT's NeXTstep OS, and also Microsoft's Windows NT OS. NeXTstep was chosen, and this supplied the platform for the modern OS X.
On February 4, 1997, Apple completed its purchase of NeXT and its NeXTstep operating system, thus bringing Steve Jobs back into Apple. On July 9, 1997, Gil Amelio was ousted as CEO of Apple by the board of directors after overseeing a 12 year record low stock price and crippling financial losses, despite an outstanding decade of innovation. Jobs stepped in as the interim CEO and began a critical restructuring of the company's product line.
1998 to 2005 New beginnings
introducing the original iMac computer in 1998.
In 1998, a year after Jobs had returned to the company, Apple introduced a new all in one Macintosh (echoing the original Macintosh 128K): the iMac, a new design that eliminated most Apple standard connections like SCSI and ADB in favor of two USB ports. While technically not impressive (it was aimed at a general market), it featured an innovative new design its translucent plastic case, originally Bondi Blue and white, and later many other colors, is considered an industrial design hallmark of the late 90s.
The iMac design team was led by Jonathan Ive (who later also designed the iPod). The iMac proved to be phenomenally successful, with 800,000 units sold in 1998, making the company a profit that year of 309 million Apple's first profitable year since Michael Spindler took the position of CEO of the company in 1993. The Power Macintosh was redesigned along similar lines, and continues to evolve to this day.
At the National Association of Broadcasters Apple purchased the Final Cut software from Macromedia, beginning their entry into the digital video editing market. iMovie was released in 1999, for consumers, and Final Cut Pro was released for professionals in the same year. Final Cut Pro has gone on to be a significant video editing program. Similarly, in 2000, Apple bought Astarte's DVDirector software, which morphed into iDVD (for consumers) and DVD Studio Pro (for professionals) at the Macworld Conference and Expo of 2001.
In 2001, Apple introduced Mac OS X, the operating system based on NeXT's NeXTstep and BSD Unix. Aimed at consumers and professionals alike, Apple claims that OS X marries stability, reliability and security of the Unix operating system with the ease of a completely overhauled user interface. To aid users in moving their applications from OS 9, the new operating system allowed the use of Mac OS 9 applications through OS X's Classic environment. Apple's Carbon API also allowed developers to adapt their OS 9 software to use Mac OS X's features with a (claimed) simple re compile.
in Cupertino, California.
In May 2001, after much speculation, Apple announced the opening of the Apple retail stores, to be located in major U.S. consumer locations. These stores were designed for two purposes: to stem the tide of Apple's declining share of the computer market and to counter a poor record of marketing Apple products by third party retail outlets.
In late 2001, Apple introduced its first iPod portable digital audio player, a move that has proven to be phenomenally successful with over 42 million units sold even though it was not originally perceived to be a successful product.ref ref Combined with a scheme to offer downloadable songs at US 99 cents per song through Apple's iTunes Music Store, there had been over downloads for iPod players by February 2006ref ref.
In 2002, Apple purchased Nothing Real, and their advanced digital compositing application, Shake, raising Apple's professional commitment even higher. In the same year they also acquired Emagic, and with it, obtained their professional quality music productivity application, Logic, which led to the development of their consumer level GarageBand application. With iPhoto's release in 2002 as well, this completed Apple's collection of consumer and professional level creativity software, with the consumer level applications being collected together into the iLife suite.
On March 10, 2005 Apple Computer announced its support for Sony's Blu Ray technology and joined the Blu ray Disc Association, or BDA. In a keynote address on June 6, 2005, Steve Jobs officially announced that Apple would begin producing Intel based Macintosh computers beginning in 2006.refApple press release ref Jobs confirmed rumors that the company had secretly been producing versions of its current operating system Mac OS X for both PowerPC and Intel processors for the previous five years, and that the transition to Intel processor systems would last until the end of 2007.
Jobs surprised the industry at Macworld 2006 however, by announcing the first Intel based Apple computers would begin selling January 2006 and that the transition would be complete by the end of that same year. Mac OS X is based on OPENSTEP, an operating system originally available for many platforms. Apple's own Darwin, the open source underpinnings of OS X, is also compiled for Intel's ''x''86 architecture.refSee articles from , , and ref
With the introduction of the Power Mac G5 in June 2003, Apple abandoned flashy colors in favor of white polycarbonate for consumer lines such as the iMac and iBook, as well as the educational eMac, and anodized aluminum or titanium for professional products like the Power Mac G5, PowerBook G4 and MacBook Pro, as well as the low cost Mac mini.
is Apple's first consumer laptop with an Intel microprocessor.
2006 to present Start of the Intel era
On January 10, 2006, Apple released its first Intel chip computers, a new notebook computer known as the MacBook Pro (a 15.4 inch laptop which replaced the PowerBook G4 line and offers a 4X speed improvement) and a new (though identical) iMac with a 2 3 times faster performance increase. Both used Intel's Core Duo chip technology.
The current operating system, OS X Tiger 10.4(.5), runs natively on the new Intel machines, as do many applications, such as iLife '06. Other applications, such as Microsoft Office and Adobe Photoshop, compiled for the PowerPC, run in emulation mode, using a technology known as Rosetta.
(see Apple Intel transition for more information regarding the transition)
The Intel based machines do not support Classic (as it has not been translated to x86 binaries), so applications that run only in Mac OS 9 and earlier will not run on these machines. All Macintosh product lines are expected to transition to Intel processors by the end of 2006. The Apple online store sold out of 17 inch iMac G5 computers in February 2006, and Apple ended the life of its 15 inch PowerBook G4 on Wednesday the 22nd of February 2006.
The Apple Intel partnership has coined a new catch phrase among computer users: "Mactel", in response to the phrase "Wintel," an informal moniker that describes all Intel powered systems running the Microsoft Windows operating system. This moniker has never been used seriously by Apple's PR or exceutives, mainly in use only in Apple fanatic circles.
Current products
, shown here, is one of Apple's most successful products. The latest iPod, with a 60 gigabyte sized hard drive, is capable of playing video.
Hardware :
Power Mac G5
MacBook Pro
PowerBook (G4)
iMac (Intel)
iMac (G5)
Mac mini (Intel)
iBook (G4)
Xserve
iPod 5G
iPod Nano
Various iPod acessories
Software :
Mac OS X
iLife (iPhoto, iMovie, iDVD, iWeb, Garageband)
iWork (Pages, Keynote)
Final Cut Pro
Final Cut Express
Aperture
Logic Pro
Logic Express
Shake
Motion
Etc.
Hardware
Apple introduced the Apple Macintosh family in 1984 and today makes consumer, professional, and educational computers. The Mac mini is the company's consumer sub desktop computer, introduced in January 2005 and designed to motivate Windows users to switch to the Macintosh platform. The iMac is a consumer desktop computer that was first introduced by Apple in 1998, and its popularity helped save the company from bankruptcy. Now in its third design iteration, the iMac is similar in concept to the original Macintosh in that the monitor and computer are housed in a single unit. The Power Mac G5, Apple's desktop computer for the professional and creative market, is a member of the Power Macintosh series first introduced in 1994. The eMac is Apple's cheaper alternative to the iMac for the education market. Apple's server range includes the Xserve, a single processor, dual processor, and cluster node server range, and the Xserve RAID for server storage options.
Apple introduced the iBook consumer portable computer as a companion to the iMac it is Apple's lowest cost portable computer. The MacBook Pro is the professional portable computer alternative to the iBook intended for the professional and creative market and replaced the PowerBook range. PowerBooks are still being manufactured and sold, but is expected that Apple will phase out both the PowerBook and iBook lines upon arrival of the heavily rumoured MacBook, the low end version of the MacBook Pro and Intel based version of the iBook. The Powerbook range was first introduced in 1991 and helped Apple's profits increase during the 1990s.
In 2001, Apple introduced the iPod digital music player and currently sells the iPod (with video), available in 30 and 60 GB models the iPod nano, available in 1 GB, 2GB and 4 GB models and the iPod shuffle, available in 512 MB and 1 GB models.
is Apple's lowest cost desktop computer.
Apple sells a variety of computer accessories for Macintosh computers including the iSight video conferencing camera, the AirPort wirelss networking products Apple Cinema HD Display and Apple Displays computer displays Mighty Mouse and Apple Wireless Mouse computer mice the Apple Wireless Keyboard computer keyboard and the Apple USB Modem.
Software
Apple independently develops computer software titles for its Mac OS X operating system. Much of the software Apple develops is bundled with its computers. An example of this is the consumer oriented iLife software package which bundles iDVD, iMovie HD, iPhoto, iTunes, GarageBand, and iWeb. Both iTunes and a feature limited version of the QuickTime media player are available as free downloads for both Mac OS X and Windows. For presentation and page layout, iWork is available.
Apple also offers a range of professional software titles. Their range of server software includes the Mac OS X Server operating system Apple Remote Desktop, a remote desktop control application WebObjects, Java Web application server and Xsan, a Storage Area Network file system. For the professional creatives market, there is Aperture for professional RAW format photo processing Final Cut Studio, a video software package, as well as Final Cut Express HD, a cut down version, for SD and HD video editors Logic Pro, a comprehensive music toolkit, and Logic Express, its prosumer cousin and Shake, an advanced effects composition program.
Apple also offers online services with .Mac which bundles .Mac HomePage, .Mac Mail, .Mac Groups social network service, .Mac iDisk, .Mac Backup, .Mac Sync, and Learning Center online tutorials.
:See also:
: List of Macintosh models grouped by CPU
: List of Macintosh software
: List of products discontinued by Apple Computer
Corporate affairs
Logo
under the fabled apple tree.
The original Apple logo was designed by Steve Jobs and Ron Wayne and depicts Isaac Newton sitting under an apple tree. However this design was soon to be replaced by the now famous rainbow apple with a "bite" taken out of it. It was one of a set of designs Rob Janoff presented Jobs in 1976 ref ref.
In the book Zeroes and Ones, author Sadie Plant speculates that the rainbow Apple logo was a homage to Alan Turing, the homosexual father of modern computer science who committed suicide by eating a cyanide laced apple in imitation of the movie ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs''. This seems to be an urban legend as the Apple logo was designed two years before Gilbert Baker's rainbow pride flag, and did not follow the same color pattern.
In 1998, the logo became single colored, though no specific color is prescribed for example, it is grey on the Power Mac G5 and Apple iMac, blue (by default) in Mac OS X, chrome on the 'About this Mac' panel and the boot screen in OS X 10.3 and 10.4, red on many Software packages, and white on the iBook, PowerBook G4 and MacBook Pro. The logo's shape is one of the most recognized brand symbols in the world, and is featured quite prominently on all Apple products and retail stores.
Criticism
Apple was criticized for its vertically integrated business model, which runs against the "received wisdom" of some economists, particularly those who study the computer industry. However, the company is profitable. Others criticize the company by suggesting it has been personality driven, especially during the two eras of Steve Jobs' tenure. Some even regard the company as a cult or at least having cult like features. Jobs' charisma, infamously referred to as his reality distortion field, has drawn criticism.
From a technical standpoint, Apple was also criticized for having a closed and proprietary architecture with the original Macintosh and refusing to adopt open standards for many years a "Not Invented Here" (NIH) culture seemed to prevail. The iTunes Music Store continues this trend, utilizing a proprietary Digital Rights Management system called FairPlay that requires burning and re ripping a CD to place purchased songs on any digital audio player besides the iPod.
That trend was largely reversed with Mac OS X, and the company now has an official policy of adopting relevant open industry standards. Mac OS X is based on a free software open source software kernel and core operating system called Darwin. Apple also uses an open source framework called WebKit in its Safari web browser.
Apple has used industry standard hardware technologies for many years. Many Apple technologies have also become industry standards where no former standard existed, for example Bonjour zero configuration networking, and FireWire. Some non Apple technologies only gained wide industry acceptance after Apple adopted them, including 3.5 inch floppy disks, SCSI, the Universal Serial Bus (USB), Wi Fi and, of course, graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Apple has recently adopted an Intel based architecture. Apple's industry standard software implementations include iCalendar, as well as a host of other networking protocols.
Open source software advocates are often critical of Apple's attempt to appeal to their particular movements. Such advocates claim that such a marketing scheme is not taken seriously enough by Apple because Mac OS X has many proprietary technologies in essential areas. Other open source advocates make a counter argument that Apple has done much more for open source software than many other major commercial software developers by releasing large portions of source code to the public through the Apple Public Source License (APSL). Some third party developers are also critical of the competing factions within Apple itself, noting an apparent rivalry between the developers of Cocoa, which came from NeXT, and those of Carbon, which came from Apple. This rivalry is seen as counterproductive and unnecessary by many developers.
Apple's retail initiative has had a mixed reception despite its success promoting the Apple brand. Retailers have suggested that Apple owned retail stores receive preference when receiving Apple hardware, obtaining limited stock product earlier and at lower prices. This accusation is denied by Apple.
! Image with unknown copyright status removed: .
Apple CEOs, 1977 present
! If you change the title of this section, please change the link at List of Apple Computer CEOs correspondingly.
1977 1981: Michael "Scotty" Scott
1981 1983: Mike Markkula
1983 1993: John Sculley
1993 1996: Michael Spindler
1996 1997: Gil Amelio
1997 present: Steve Jobs
Current Apple Board of Directors
Fred D. Anderson, managing director of Elevation Partners
Bill Campbell, chairman of Intuit, Inc.
Millard Drexler, chairman and CEO of J.Crew
Al Gore, former Vice President of the United States
Steve Jobs, CEO of Apple and Pixar
Arthur D. Levinson, chairman and CEO of Genentech
Jerry York, chairman, president and CEO of Harwinton Capital
Current Apple executives
Steve Jobs, CEO
Timothy D. Cook, chief operating officer
Jon Rubinstein, senior vice president of iPod division
Philip W. Schiller, senior vice president of worldwide product marketing
Bertrand Serlet, senior vice president of software engineering
Nancy R. Heinen, senior vice president and general counsel
Ron Johnson, senior vice president of retail
Sina Tamaddon, senior vice president of applications
Peter Oppenheimer, senior vice president and CFO
Avie Tevanian, chief software technology officer
User culture
:''See Also: Cult of Mac''
Some Apple customers are devoted to their brand. Some refuse to buy from competitors and stridently uphold their belief in the perceived superiority of Apple products according to surveys by J. D. Power, Apple has the highest brand and repurchase loyalty of any computer manufacturer. While this brand loyalty is considered unusual for any product, Apple appears not to have gone out of its way to create it. At one time, Apple evangelists were actively engaged by the company, but this was after the phenomenon was already firmly established. As Guy Kawasaki has said, " the brand fanaticism was something that was stumbled upon".ref by Ben McConnell and Jackie Huba ref
Macintosh users meet at the Apple Expo and MacWorld Expo trade shows where Apple introduces new products each year to the industry and public. Many users show their loyalty and devotion by wearing Apple t shirts. Another example of Apple's user culture is the Apple Store openings where many wait and sleep outside of stores for days prior to their openings.
John Sculley, former Apple CEO, told the Guardian newspaper in 1997: "''People talk about technology, but Apple was a marketing company, It was the marketing company of the decade.''".ref ref
Notable litigation
Apple's earliest court action dates to 1978 when Apple Corps, The Beatles founded record label, filed suit against Apple Computer for trademark infringement. The suit settled in 1981 with an amount of 80,000 being paid to Apple Corps. As a condition of the settlement, Apple Computer agreed to stay out of the music business. The case arose in 1989 again when Apple Corps sued, claiming violation of the 1981 settlement agreement. In 1991 another settlement of around 26.5 million was reached. ref ref In September 2003 Apple Computer was sued by Apple Corps again, this time for introducing iTunes and the iPod which Apple Corps believed was a violation of the previous agreement by Apple not to distribute music. ref ref The date for this trial has been set for March 27, 2006 in the UK. At the present time the Beatles' songs are not available for download from any legal music download sites, including the iTunes Music Store.
In 1982 Apple filed a lawsuit against Franklin Computer Corp., alleging that Franklin's ACE 100 personal computer used illegal copies of Apple's operating system and ROM. Apple v. Franklin established the fundamental basis of copyright of computer software. As a result, Apple began embedding an encrypted image in ROM. This icon displays "Stolen from Apple Computer".
In 1988 Apple sued Microsoft and Hewlett Packard on the grounds that they infringed Apple's copyright on a GUI. The Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp. trial lasted for four years. The ruling was decided against Apple, and the concept of a GUI was no longer the domain of Apple alone.
In July 1998 Abdul Traya registered the domain name ''appleimac.com'', two months after Apple announced the iMac, in an attempt to draw attention to a web hosting business. ref ref After a legal dispute that lasted until April 1999, Traya and Apple settled out of court with Apple paying legal fees and giving Traya a "''token payment''" in exchange for the domain name. ref ref
In 1994 Apple was sued by the astronomer and science popularizer Carl Sagan for using his name as the internal code name for the Power Macintosh 7100. Sagan lost the suit twice. See the Carl Sagan article for details.
In November 2000, Benjamin Cohen of registered the domain name "itunes.co.uk" for an MP3 search engine. Apple was granted a UK restricted (non music) trademark for ITUNES on March 23, 2001, and launched its popular iTunes music store service in the UK in 2004. In 2005, Apple took the matter to the Dispute Resolution Service operated by .uk domain name registry Nominet UK, stating that they had rights in the name "iTunes". An expert decided in Apple's favor in the dispute. Cohen launched a media offensive stating that the DRS was biased towards large businesses and made frequent threats of lawsuits against Nominet.
In November 2004, two popular weblog sites that feature Apple rumors publicly revealed information about an unreleased Apple product code named "Asteroid", also known as "Project Q97". The sites, "AppleInsider" and "PowerPage", were subpoenaed for information about their sources in the Apple v. Does case. In February 2005 it was decided by a court official in California that the bloggers do not have the same shield law protection as do journalists. In a related case, the websites went on to fight the journalistic status decision. In a separate matter, Apple filed a lawsuit against website Think Secret in January 2005, claiming that the site's reports about forthcoming Apple products violated trade secret law.
In May 2005 Apple entered into a class action settlement ref ref, upheld on December 20, 2005 following an appeal, regarding the battery life of iPod music players sold prior to May 2004. Eligible members of the class are entitled to extended warranties, store credit, cash compensation, or battery replacement.
See also
Apple Computer financial history
Apple Developer Connection Developer relations program
Apple Intel transition
Apple typography Apple's type related endeavors, technological and artistic
Inside Macintosh
List of Apple Computer slogans
Macintosh clones Discussion of Apple's licensing of the Macintosh platform
Mac rumors community in recent years, a subculture has developed around rumored products
Pirates of Silicon Valley A movie based on the rise of Apple and Microsoft.
References
references
Further reading
Gil Amelio, William L. Simon (1999) ''In the Firing Line: My 500 days at Apple'' ISBN 0887309194
Jim Carlton, ''Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania and Business Blunders'' ISBN 0887309658
Owen Linzmayer (2004), ''Apple Confidential 2.0'', No Starch Press ISBN 1593270100
Michael Malone (1999), ''Infinite Loop'' ISBN 0385486847
Steven Levy, ''Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed Everything'' ISBN 0140291776
Andy Hertzfeld (2004), ''Revolution in the Valley'', O'Reilly Books ISBN 0596007191
, retrieved November 25, 2005
External links
! Please do not add unnecessary links to this section: Wikipedia is not a link repository. See the Talk page for this article, and http: en.wikipedia.org wiki Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not
at BuyBlue.org
Category:1976 establishments
Category:Brands
Category:Companies based in California
Category:Electronics companies
Category:Home computer hardware companies
Category:Human computer interaction notables
bg:
ca:Apple Computer
cs:Apple
da:Apple Computer
de:Apple
es:Apple Computer
eo:Apple
fa:
fr:Apple Computer
gl:Apple Computer
ko:
hr:Apple Computer
id:Apple Computer
ia:Apple Computer
it:Apple Computer
he:
la:Apple Computatores
lt:Apple
hu:Apple Computer
ms:Apple
nl:Apple Computer
nds:Apple
ja:
no:Apple
pl:Apple Computer
pt:Apple Computer, Inc.
ro:Apple Computer
ru:Apple Computer
simple:Apple Computer
sk:Apple Computer
fi:Apple Computer
sv:Apple Computer
th:
tr:Apple Computer
zh:
:''For other uses, see Aberdeenshire (disambiguation).''
infobox Scotland council area
Council Aberdeenshire
Image
SizeRank 4th
Size 6,313 km
Water ?
AdminHQ Aberdeen
ISO GB ABD
ONS 00QB
PopulationRank 6th
PopulationDate 2004
Population 232,850
PopulationDensity 37 km
CouncilDetails Aberdeenshire Councilbr http: www.aberdeenshire.gov.uk
Control Liberal Democrat Independent Control
MPs ulliMalcolm BruceliAlex SalmondliRobert Smith ul
MSPs ulliStewart StevensonliNora RadcliffeliMike Rumbles ul
'''Aberdeenshire''' (''Siorrachd Obar Dheathain'' in Gaelic) is one of the 32 unitary council areas in Scotland.
Present day Aberdeenshire does not include the City of Aberdeen which is a unitary authority in its own right. However Aberdeenshire council has its headquarters at Woodhill House, Westburn Road, in Aberdeen The only Scottish council whose headquarters are based outside of the council area. It also borders Angus, Perth and Kinross, Highland, and Moray.
History
The present council area is named after the historic county of Aberdeenshire which had different boundaries and was abolished in 1975. Between 1975 and 1996 the area became part of the region of Grampian. When the Scottish regions were abolished, a new unitary council area of Aberdeenshire was created, which revived the name of the former county but with different boundaries.
Aberdeenshire council
Aberdeenshire Council was established in April 1996, replacing three District councils (Banff and Buchan, Gordon and Kincardine and Deeside) and part of the area of Grampian Regional Council.
There are 68 councillors in 2004 they were 28 Liberal Democrat, 15 SNP, 14 Independent and 11 Conservative.
The Council's net expenditure is 399.1m a year (2003 04).
Education takes the largest share of expenditure (55 ), followed by Social Work and Housing (19 ), Transportation and Infrastructure (11 ), and Joint Services such as Fire and Police (10 ). 22 of revenue is raised locally through the Council Tax. Average Band D Council Tax is the eighth lowest in mainland Scotland at 966 (2003 04).
The council area has a population of 226,871, representing 4.5 of Scotland's total, and a 20 increase since 1981, 50 since 1971. Major towns are Peterhead (17,947), Fraserburgh (12,454), Inverurie (10,882), Stonehaven (9,577), Westhill (9,498) and Ellon (8,754). The population has a higher proportion of younger age groups than the rest of Scotland, reflecting employment driven in migration in recent decades.
The council has devolved power to six area committees:
Banff Buchan,
Buchan,
Formartine,
Garioch,
Marr,
Kincardine Mearns
'''Banff Buchan'''
Population 35,742 (2001 Census)
Fishing and agriculture are important industries, together with associated processing and service activity.
The area is relatively self contained, and in recent years has seen a small decline in population. It does, however, have tourism assets in its coastline, coastal villages and visitor attractions. Economic dependency, peripherality, and the future of the Common Fisheries Agricultural Policies, are key issues. The Buchan Local Action Plan will address some of these concerns. The Area qualifies for European Union Objective 2 structural funding.
'''Buchan'''
Population 39,160 (2001 Census)
Peterhead is the largest town in Aberdeenshire the principal white fish landing port in Europe and a major oil industry service centre. Equally important, is the nearby gas terminal at St Fergus.
Attempts are being made to counter the negative effects of several recent key company closures and economic threats. Inland, the area is dependent upon agriculture, and many villages have seen a decline in population and services. Issues affecting Banff and Buchan also apply here, as does the future of the oil and gas industry. Part of Buchan benefits from EU aid coverage. Opportunities exist through the Buchan Local Action Plan to safeguard and enhance the economic future of Peterhead and Buchan.
'''Formartine'''
Population 36,478 (2001 Census)
Formartine has experienced rapid population growth, particularly around Ellon and Oldmeldrum, and in the south east where development has spread outwith the city of Aberdeen. By contrast, the area around Turriff retains strong dependency on the traditional agricultural economy. The area's coastline and rural environment offer recreation potential.
'''Garioch'''
Population 42,947 (2001 Census)
Centred on Inverurie, a traditional rural market town, Garioch has also experienced rapid growth due to its proximity to the city of Aberdeen. Significant growth in population, services and employment is anticipated in the A96 corridor and in Westhill. The area is largely agricultural, but is strongly affected by the City's economy and the oil and gas sector. Garioch holds growing potential for tourism, in its environment and archaeological heritage.
'''Marr'''
Population 34,038 (2001 Census)
To the west, the mountain environment of the Cairngorms National Park sustains a well developed tourist industry based on heritage and outdoor pursuits. Forestry and livestock farming are key industries, particularly in remoter areas. Part of the area has qualified for EU financial assistance. To the east, Marr has experienced population growth due to its strong commuter links with the city of Aberdeen.
'''Kincardine and Mearns'''
Population 38,506 (2001 Census)
Transport links with Aberdeen have encouraged very rapid population growth, especially to the north of the area. Existing settlements such as Portlethen and Stonehaven have greatly expanded, along with industrial activity. The southern part is more self contained, with the fertile Mearns area sustaining a strong agricultural economy. Small scale tourism activity exists along its attractive coastline and former fishing villages.
Category:Unitary authorities of Scotland
de:Aberdeenshire
fr:Aberdeenshire
no:Aberdeenshire
pl:Aberdeenshire
zh:
'''Aztlan Underground''' is a fusion band from Los Angeles. Since the early 1990s, Aztlan Underground has played Rapcore. Indigenous drums, flutes, and rattles are commonplace in its musical compositions.
This unique sound is the backdrop for the band's message of dignity for indigenous people, all of humanity, and Earth. Aztlan Underground has been cultivating a grass roots audience across the country, which has become a large and loyal underground following. Their music includes spoken word pieces and elements of punk, hip hop, rock, funk, jazz, and indigenous music, among others.
The artists are Chenek "DJ Bean" (turntables, samples and percussion), Yaotl (vocals, indigenous percussion), Joe "Peps" (bass, rattles), Zo Rock (Guitars), Ace (drums, indigenous percussion), and Bulldog (vocals, flute).
Aztlan Underground appeared on television on Culture Clash on Fox in 1993, was part of ''Breaking Out'', a concert on pay per view in 1998, and was featured in the independent films ''Algun Dia'' and ''Frontierlandia''.
The band has been mentioned or featured in various newspapers and magazines: the Vancouver Sun, Northshore News (Vancouver, Canada newspaper), New Times (Los Angeles weekly entertainment newspaper), BLU Magazine (underground hip hop magazine), BAM Magazine (Southern California), La Banda Elastica Magazine, and the Los Angeles Times Calendar section. It is also the subject of a chapter in ''It's Not About A Salary'', by Brian Cross.
It was nominated in the New Times 1998 "Best Latin Influenced" category, the BAM Magazine 1999 "Best Rock en Espa ol" category, and the LA Weekly 1999 "Best Hip Hop" category.
Mailing address: Aztlan Underground, P.O. Box 921776, San Fernando, CA 91392.
Category:American musical groups
on 12 March 1938.
The '''Anschluss''' (German: ''connection'', or ''political union''), also known as the '''Anschluss sterreichs''', was the 1938 inclusion of Austria into "Greater Germany" by the Nazi regime.
The events of March 12, 1938, were the first major steps in Adolf Hitler's long desired expansion of Germany. The Anschluss followed the return to Germany of the Saar region, which had been under the control of the League of Nations for 15 years by the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. It was followed by the inclusion of the Sudetenland later in 1938, the invasion of the remainder of Czechoslovakia in 1939, and the invasion of Poland.
The Anschluss was preceded by a period of growing political pressure on Austria, exerted by Germany, demanding recognition of the outlawed Austrian National Socialist party and later, their share of Government. In 1938 Austrian chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg, in a last bid to retain Austrian independence, announced a referendum to determine independence or union with Germany. Germany then pressured Schuschnigg into handing over power to the Nazi party. This well planned internal overthrow by the Austrian Nazi Party of Austria's state institutions in Vienna on March 11 meant that when Wehrmacht troops entered into Austria to enforce the Anschluss, no fighting ever took place. The international response to the Anschluss was mild: The World War I Allies only lodged diplomatic protests, and no concrete action was taken to reverse the Anschluss, even though the allies were, on paper, committed to upholding the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, which specifically prohibited the union of Austria and Germany. Austria ceased to exist as an independent nation until a preliminary Austrian government was finally reinstated on April 27, 1945, and was legally recognized by the Allies in the following months.
Situation before the Anschluss
:''Main articles: German Empire and Austrofascism''
The idea of grouping all German people into one state had been the subject of inconclusive debate since the end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806. Prior to 1866, it was generally thought that the unification of the German peoples could only succeed under Austrian leadership (''Grossdeutschland''), but the loss of the Austro Prussian War by Austria allowed Otto von Bismarck to establish the Prussian dominated German Empire in 1871 without the German speaking parts of Austria Hungary (''Kleindeutschland''). When the latter broke up in 1918, many German speaking Austrians hoped to join with Germany in the realignment of Europe, but the Treaty of Versailles and the Treaty of Saint Germain of 1919 explicitly vetoed the inclusion of Austria within a German state, because France and Britain feared the power of a larger Germany.
In the early 1930s, popular support for union with Germany remained overwhelming, and the Austrian government looked to a possible customs union with Germany in 1931. However Hitler's and the Nazis' rise to power in Germany left the Austrian government with little enthusiasm for such formal ties. Hitler, born in Austria, had promoted an "all German Reich" from the early beginnings of his leadership in the NSDAP and had publicly stated as early as 1924 in ''Mein Kampf'' that he would attempt a union, by force if necessary.
Austria shared the economic turbulence of post 1929 Europe with a high unemployment rate and unstable commerce and industry. Similar to its northern and southern neighbours these uncertain conditions made the young democracy very vulnerable. The First Republic, dominated from the late 1920s by the Catholic nationalist Christian Social Party (CS), gradually disintegrated from 1933 (dissolution of parliament and ban of the Austrian National Socialists) to 1934 (Austrian Civil War in February and ban of all remaining parties except the CS) and evolved into a pseudo fascist, corporatist model of one party government which combined the CS and the paramilitary Heimwehr with absolute state domination of labour relations and no freedom of the press (see Austrofascism and Patriotic Front). Power was centralized in the office of the Chancellor who was empowered to rule by decree. The predominance of the Christian Social Party (whose economic policies were based on the papal encyclical ''Rerum novarum'') was an Austrian phenomenon in that Austria's national identity had strong Catholic elements which were incorporated into the movement by way of clerical authoritarian tendencies which are certainly not to be found in Nazism. Both Engelbert Dollfuss and his successor Kurt Schuschnigg turned to Austria's other fascist neighbour, Italy, for inspiration and support. Indeed, the statist corporatism often referred to as Austrofascism bore more resemblance to Italian Fascism than German National Socialism. Benito Mussolini was able to support the independent aspirations of the Austrian dictatorship until his need for German support in Ethiopia forced him into a client relationship with Berlin that began with the 1937 Berlin Rome Axis.
When Chancellor Dollfuss was assassinated by the illegal Austrian Nazi party on 25 July 1934 in a failed coup, the second civil war within only one year followed, lasting until August 1934. After the failed Nazi coup, many leading Austrian Nazis fled to Germany and continued to coordinate their steps from there while the remaining Austrian Nazis started to make use of terrorist attacks against the Austrian governmental institutions (causing a death toll of more than 800 between 1934 and 1938). Dollfuss' successor Schuschnigg, who followed the political course of Dollfuss, took drastic actions against the Nazis, for instance the rounding up of Nazis (but also Social Democrats) in internment camps.
The Anschluss of 1938
Hitler's first moves
In early 1938 Hitler had consolidated his power in Germany and was ready to reach out to fulfil his long planned expansion. After a lengthy period of pressure by Germany, Hitler met Schuschnigg on 12 February 1938 in Berchtesgaden (Bavaria) and instructed him to lift the ban of the Austrian Nazi party, reinstate full party freedoms, release all imprisoned members of the Nazi party and let them participate in the government. Otherwise he would take military action. Schuschnigg complied with Hitler's demands and appointed Arthur Seyss Inquart, a Nazi lawyer, as Interior Minister and another Nazi, Edmund Glaise Horstenau, as Minister without Portfolio.
Even before the February meeting, Schuschnigg was under considerable pressure from Germany. This may be seen in the demand to remove the chief of staff of the Austrian Army Alfred Jansa from his office in January 1938. Jansa and his staff had developed a scenario for Austria's defence against a German attack, a situation Hitler wanted to avoid at all costs. Schuschnigg subsequently complied with the demand.
During the following weeks Schuschnigg realized that his newly appointed ministers were gradually working on taking over his authority. Schuschnigg tried to gather support throughout Austria and inflame patriotism among the people. For the first time since 12 February 1934 (the time of the Austrian Civil War), socialists and communists could legally appear in public again. The communists announced their unconditional support for the Austrian government, understandable in light of Nazi pressure on Austria. The socialists demanded further concessions from Schuschnigg before they were willing to side with him.
Schuschnigg announces a referendum
On 9 March, as a last resort to preserve Austria's independence, Schuschnigg scheduled a plebiscite on the independence of Austria for 13 March. To secure a large majority in the referendum, Schuschnigg set the minimum voting age at 24 in order to exclude younger voters who largely sympathized with Nazi ideology. Holding a referendum was a highly risky gamble for Schuschnigg, and on the next day it became apparent that Hitler would not simply stand by while Austria declared its independence by public vote. Hitler declared that the plebiscite would be subject to major fraud and that Germany would not accept it. In addition the German Ministry of Propaganda issued press reports that riots had broken out in Austria and that large parts of the Austrian population were calling for German troops to restore order. Schuschnigg immediately publicly replied that the reports of riots were nothing but lies as they actually were.
Hitler sent an ultimatum to Schuschnigg on 11 March, demanding that he hand over all power to the Austrian National Socialists or face an invasion. The ultimatum was set to expire at noon, but was extended by two hours. However, without waiting for an answer, Hitler had already signed the order to send troops into Austria at one o'clock, issuing it to Hermann G ring only hours later.
Schuschnigg desperately sought support for Austrian independence in the hours following the ultimatum, but, realizing that neither France nor the United Kingdom were willing to take steps, he resigned as Chancellor that evening. In the radio broadcast in which he announced his resignation, he argued that he accepted the changes and allowed the Nazis to take over the government in order to avoid bloodshed. Meanwhile, Austrian President Wilhelm Miklas refused to appoint Seyss Inquart Chancellor and asked other Austrian politicians such as Michael Skubl and Sigismund Schilhawsky to assume the office. However, the Nazis were well organised. Within hours they managed to take control of many parts of Vienna, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs (controlling the Police). As Miklas continued to refuse to appoint a Nazi government and Seyss Inquart still could not send a telegram in the name of the Austrian government demanding German troops to restore order, Hitler became furious. At about 10 pm, well after Hitler had signed and issued the order for the invasion, G ring and Hitler gave up on waiting and published a forged telegram containing a request by the Austrian Government for German troops to enter Austria. Around midnight, after nearly all critical offices and buildings had fallen into Nazi hands in Vienna and the main political party members of the old government had been arrested, Miklas finally conceded to appoint Seyss Inquart Chancellor.
German troops march into Austria
! 1938. The ballot text reads "Do you agree with the reunification of Austria with the German Empire that was enacted on 13 March 1938, and do you vote for the party of our leader Adolf Hitler?," the large circle is labelled "Yes," the smaller "No."
1938, with a poster instructing voters how to vote "Yes".
On the morning of 12 March the 8th Army of the German Wehrmacht crossed the German Austrian border. They did not face resistance by the Austrian Army on the contrary, the German troops were greeted by cheering Austrians. Although the invading forces were badly organized and coordination between the units was poor, it mattered little because no fighting took place. It did, however, serve as a warning for commanders in future German military operations such as that against Czechoslovakia. Curiously, the invasion claimed its first fatality within only a few hours: the Nazi Heinrich Kurz von Goldstein died of a heart attack during the celebrations in Salzburg.
Hitler's car crossed the border in the afternoon at Braunau, his birthplace. In the evening, he arrived at Linz and was given an enthusiastic welcome in the city hall. The atmosphere was so intense that G ring in a telephone call that evening stated: "There is unbelievable jubilation in Austria. We ourselves did not think that sympathies would be so intense."
Hitler's further travel through Austria changed into a triumphal tour that climaxed in Vienna, when around 200,000 Austrians gathered on the Heldenplatz (Square of Heroes) to hear Hitler proclaim the Austrian Anschluss (). Hitler later commented: "Certain foreign newspapers have said that we fell on Austria with brutal methods. I can only say: even in death they cannot stop lying. I have in the course of my political struggle won much love from my people, but when I crossed the former frontier (into Austria) there met me such a stream of love as I have never experienced. Not as tyrants have we come, but as liberators."
The Anschluss was given immediate effect by legislative act on 13 March, subject to ratification by a plebiscite. Austria became the province of Ostmark, and Seyss Inquart was appointed Governor. The plebiscite was held on 10 April and officially recorded a support of 99.73 of the voters.
While historians concur that the result itself was not manipulated, the voting process was not free or secret. Officials were present directly beside the voting booths and received the voting ballot by hand (in contrast to a secret vote where the voting ballot is inserted into a closed box). In addition, Hitler's brutal methods to emasculate any opposition had been immediately implemented in the weeks preceding the referendum. Even before the first German soldier crossed the border, Heinrich Himmler and a few SS officers landed in Vienna to arrest prominent representatives of the First Republic such as Richard Schmitz, Leopold Figl, Friedrich Hillegeist and Franz Olah. During the weeks following the Anschluss (and before the plebiscite), Social Democrats, Communists, and other potential political dissenters, as well as Jews, were rounded up and either imprisoned or sent to concentration camps. Within only a few days of 12 March, 70,000 people had been arrested. The referendum itself was subject to large scale propaganda and to the abrogation of the voting rights of around 400,000 people (nearly 10 of the eligible voting population), mainly former members of left wing parties and Jews.
Interestingly, in some remote areas of Austria the referendum on the independence of Austria on 13 March was held despite the Wehrmacht's presence in Austria (it took up to 3 days to occupy every part of Austria). For instance, in the village of Innervillgraten a majority of 95 voted for Austria's independence.
Austria remained part of the Third Reich until the end of World War II when a preliminary Austrian Government declared the Anschluss void and null on April 27 1945. After the war then allied occupied Austria was recognized and treated as a separate country, but was not restored to sovereignty until the Austrian State Treaty and Austrian Declaration of Neutrality, both of 1955, largely due to the rapid development of the Cold War and disputes between the Soviet Union and its former allies over its foreign policy.
Reactions and consequences of the Anschluss
The picture of Austria in the first days of its existence in the Third Reich is one of contradictions: At one and the same time, Hitler's terror regime began to tighten its grip in every area of society, beginning with mass arrests and thousands of Austrians attempting to flee in every direction yet Austrians could be seen cheering and welcoming German troops entering Austrian territory. Many Austrian political figures did not hesitate to announce their support of the Anschluss and their relief that it happened without violence.
Cardinal Theodor Innitzer (a political figure of the CS) declared as early as 12 March: "The Viennese Catholics should thank the Lord for the bloodless way this great political change has occurred, and they should pray for a great future for Austria. Needless to say, everyone should obey the orders of the new institutions." The other Austrian bishops followed suit some days later. Vatican Radio, however, immediately broadcast a vehement denunciation of the German action, and Cardinal Pacelli ordered Innitzer to report to Rome. Before meeting with the pope, Innitzer met with Pacelli, who had been outraged by Innitzer's statement. He made it clear that Innitzer needed to retract he was made to sign a new statement, issued on behalf of all the Austrian bishops, which provided: '' The solemn declaration of the Austrian bishops ... was clearly not intended to be an approval of something that was not and is not compatible with God's law ''. The Vatican newspaper also reported that the bishops' earlier statement had been issued without the approval from Rome.
Robert Kauer, President of the Protestants in Austria, greeted Hitler on 13 March as "saviour of the 350,000 German Protestants in Austria and liberator from a five year hardship." Even Karl Renner, the most famous Social Democrat of the First Republic announced his support for the Anschluss and appealed to all Austrians to vote in favour of it on 10 April.
The international response to the expansion of Germany may be described as ''moderate''. ''The Times'' commented that 200 years ago Scotland had joined England as well and that this event would not really differ much. On 14 March the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain noted in the House of Commons:
policy led to the Treaty of Munich, the next major step for Hitler to create an all German Reich
blockquote
His Majesty's Government have throughout been in the closest touch with the situation. The Foreign Secretary saw the German Foreign Minister on the 10thof March and addressed to him a grave warning on the Austrian situation and upon what appeared to be the policy of the German Government in regard to it. . . . Late on the 11thof March our Ambassador in Berlin registered a protest in strong terms with the German Government against such use of coercion, backed by force, against an independent State in order to create a situation incompatible with its national independence.
blockquote
However the speech concluded:
blockquoteI imagine that according to the temperament of the individual the events which are in our minds to day will be the cause of regret, of sorrow, perhaps of indignation. They cannot be regarded by His Majesty's Government with indifference or equanimity. They are bound to have effects which cannot yet be measured. The immediate result must be to intensify the sense of uncertainty and insecurity in Europe. Unfortunately, while the policy of appeasement would lead to a relaxation of the economic pressure under which many countries are suffering to day, what has just occurred must inevitably retard economic recovery and, indeed, increased care will be required to ensure that marked deterioration does not set in. This is not a moment for hasty decisions or for careless words. We must consider the new situation quickly, but with cool judgement... As regards our defence programmes, we have always made it clear that they were flexible and that they would have to be reviewed from time to time in the light of any development in the international situation. It would be idle to pretend that recent events do not constitute a change of the kind that we had in mind. Accordingly we have decided to make a fresh review, and in due course we shall announce what further steps we may think it necessary to take. blockquote
The lenient reaction to the Anschluss was the first major consequence of the strictly followed appeasement British foreign policy strategy. The international reaction on the events of March 12th 1938 led Hitler to conclude that he could use even more aggressive tactics in his ''roadmap'' to expand the Third Reich, as he would later in annexing the Sudetenland. The relatively bloodless Anschluss helped pave the way for the Treaty of Munich in September 1938 and the annexation of Czechoslovakia in 1939, because it reinforced appeasement as the right way for Britain to deal with Hitler's Germany.
Legacy of the 1938 Anschluss
The Anschluss: annexation or union?
Some historical sources, for instance Encyclop dia Britannica and the Encarta Encyclopedia describe the Anschluss as an "annexation" . Outside this context "Anschluss" is properly translated as "join", "connection", "unification" or "political union". The German word "Annektierung" would mean military annexation unambiguously. However, the word commonly used in German for the process of spring 1938 is ''Anschluss''.
The precise character of the Anschluss remains a difficulty essential to Austria's understanding of its history and the obligations it entails.
The appeal of Nazism to Austrians
The Anschluss can be misunderstood as ''simply'' a military annexation of an unwilling Austria, but this lends itself to confusion with other German military occupations of European countries. It also tends to conceal the culpability of many Austrians in Nazi crimes, most of all the Holocaust, by perpetuating the myth of Austria as the first victim of Hitler's expansionism. Despite the subversion of Austrian political process by Hitler's sympathisers and associates in Austria, Austrian acceptance of direct government by Hitler's Berlin is a very different phenomenon from the administration of other collaborationist countries.
With the break up of the Austro Hungarian monarchy in 1918, popular opinion was for unification with Germany, in realization of the Grossdeutschland concept this however was forbidden by the Treaty of St. Germain, to which the newly formed Austrian republic was obliged. This was in stark contrast to the general concept of self determination which governed the Versailles talks, as was the inclusion of the Sudetenland, a German populated area of the former Austro Hungarian province of Bohemia (whose population favoured joining German speaking Austria), in the newly formed Czechoslovak republic, giving rise to revisionist sentiment. This laid the grounds for the general willingness of the populations of both Austria and the Sudetenland for inclusion into the Third Reich, as well as the relative acceptance of the Western Governments, who made little protest until March 1939, when the irredentist argument lost its value following the annexation of the rest of Czech speaking Bohemia, as well as Moravia and Czech Silesia.
The small Republic of Austria was seen by many of its citizens as economically unviable, a feeling that was exacerbated by the Depression of the 1930s. In contrast the Nazi dictatorship appeared to have found a solution to the economic crisis of the 1930s. Furthermore, the break up had thrown Austria into a crisis of identity, and many Austrians, of both the left and the right, felt that Austria should be part of a larger German nation.
Politically, Austria had not had the time to develop a strongly democratic society to resist the onslaught of totalitarianism. The final version of the First Republic's constitution had only lasted from 1929 to 1933. The First Republic was ridden by violent strife between the different political camps the Christian Social Party were complicit in the murder of large numbers of adherents of the decidedly left wing Social Democratic Party by the police during the July Revolt of 1927. In fact, with the end of democracy in 1933 and the establishment of Austrofascism, Austria had already purged its democratic institutions and instituted a dictatorship long before the Anschluss. There is thus little to distinguish radically the ''institutions'' of at least the post 1934 Austrian government before or after 12 March 1938.
The members of the leading Christian Social Party were fervent Catholics, but not particularly anti semitic. For instance Jews were not prohibited from exercising any profession, in sharp contrast to the Third Reich. Many prominent Austrian scientists, professors, and lawyers at the time were Jewish in fact Vienna, with its Jewish population of about 200,000, was considered a safe haven from 1933 to 1938 by many Jews who fled Nazi Germany. However, the Nazis' anti Semitism found fertile soil in Austria. Anti Semitic elements had emerged as a force in Austrian politics in the late nineteenth century, with the rise in prominence of figures such as Georg Ritter von Sch nerer and Karl Lueger (who had influenced the young Hitler), and in the 1930s anti Semitism was rampant, as Jews were a convenient scapegoat for economic problems.
In addition to the economic appeal of the Anschluss, the popular underpinning of Nazi politics as a total art form (the refinement of film propaganda exemplified by Riefenstahl's ''Triumph of the Will'' and mythological aestheticism of a broadly conceived national destiny of the German people within a "Thousand Year Reich") gave the Nazis a massive advantage in advancing their claims to power. Moreover Austrofascism was less grand in its appeal than the choice between Stalin and Hitler to which many European intellectuals of the time believed themselves reduced by the end of the decade. Austria had effectively no alternative view of its historical mission when the choice was upon it. In spite of Dollfuss' and Schuschnigg's hostility to Nazi political ambitions, the Nazis succeeded in convincing many Austrians to accept what they viewed as the historical destiny of the German people rather than continue as part of a distinct sovereign nation.
The Second Republic
The Moscow Declaration
1945 mugshot for the Nuremberg Trials.
The Moscow Declaration of 1943, signed by the United States of America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the United Kingdom included a "Declaration on Austria," which stated the following:
blockquote
pThe governments of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States of America are agreed that Austria, the first free country to fall a victim to Hitlerite aggression, shall be liberated from German domination. p
pThey regard the annexation imposed on Austria by Germany on 15 March 1938, as null and void. They consider themselves as in no way bound by any charges affected in Austria since that date. They declare that they wish to see re established a free and independent Austria and thereby to open the way for the Austrian people themselves, as well as those neighbouring States which will be face with similar problems, to find that political and economic security which is the only basis for lasting peace. p
pAustria is reminded, however that she has a responsibility, which she cannot evade, for participation in the war at the side of Hitlerite Germany, and that in the final settlement account will inevitably be taken of her own contribution to her liberation. p
blockquote
To judge from the last paragraph and subsequent determinations at the Nuremberg Trial, the Declaration was intended to serve as propaganda aimed at stirring Austrian resistance (although there are Austrians counted as Righteous Among the Nations, there never was an effective Austrian armed resistance of the sort found in other countries under German occupation) more than anything else, although the exact text of the declaration is said to have a somewhat complex drafting history. At Nuremberg Arthur Seyss Inquart and Franz von Papen , in particular, were both indicted under count one (conspiracy to commit crimes against peace) specifically for their activities in support of the Austrian Nazi Party and the Anschluss, but neither was convicted of this count. In acquitting von Papen, the court noted that his actions were in its view political immoralities but not crimes under its charter. Seyss Inquart was convicted of other serious war crimes, most of which took place in Poland and the Netherlands, and was sentenced to death.
Austrian identity and the "victim theory"
1938.
After World War II, many Austrians sought comfort in the myth of Austria as the Nazis' first victim. Although the Nazi party was promptly banned, Austria did not have the same thorough process of de Nazification at the top of government which was imposed on Germany for a time. Lacking outside pressure for political reform, factions of Austrian society tried for a long time to advance the view that the Anschluss was ''only'' an annexation at bayonet point.
This view of the events of 1938 has deep roots in the ten years of Allied occupation and the struggle to regain Austrian sovereignty: The ''victim theory'' played an essential role in the negotiations on the Austrian State Treaty with the Soviets, and by pointing to the Moscow Declaration Austrian politicians heavily relied on it to achieve a solution for Austria different from the division into East and West in Germany. The State Treaty, alongside with the subsequent Austrian declaration of permanent neutrality marked important milestones for the solidification of Austria's independent national identity during the following decades.
As Austrian politicians of the left and right attempted to reconcile their differences in order to avoid the violent conflict that had dominated the first republic, discussions of both Austrofascism and Austria's role in Nazism were largely avoided. Still, the Austrian People's Party ( VP) has advanced and still sometimes advances the argument that the establishment of the Dollfuss dictatorship was necessary in order to maintain Austrian independence, while the Austrian Social Democratic Party (SP ) argues that the dictatorship stripped the country of the democratic resources necessary to repel Hitler.
Political events
For decades, the victim theory established in the Austrian mind remained largely undisputed. The Austrian public was only rarely forced to confront the legacy of the Third Reich (most notably during the events of 1965 concerning Taras Borodajkewycz, a professor of economic history notorious for anti Semitic remarks, when Ernst Kirchweger, a concentration camp survivor, was killed by a right wing protester during riots). It was not until the 1980s that Austrians were finally massively confronted with their past. The main catalyst for the start of a ''Vergangenheitsbew ltigung'' was the so called Waldheim affair. The Austrian reply to allegations during the 1986 Presidential election campaign that successful candidate and former UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim had been a member of the Nazi party and of the infamous SA (he was later absolved of direct involvement in war crimes) was that scrutiny was an unwelcome intervention in the country's internal affairs. Despite the politicians' reactions to international criticism of Waldheim, the Waldheim affair started the first serious major discussion on Austria's past and the Anschluss.
Another main factor for Austria and its coming to terms with the past emerged in the 1980s: J rg Haider and the rise of the FP . The party had combined elements of the pan German right with free market liberalism since its foundation in 1955, but after Haider had ascended to the party chairmanship in 1986, the liberal elements became increasingly marginalized while Haider began to openly use nationalist and anti immigrant rhetoric. He was often criticised for tactics such as the ''v lkisch'' (ethnic) definition of national interest ("Austria for Austrians") and his apologism for Austria's past, notably calling members of the Waffen SS "men of honour". Following an enormous electoral rise in the 1990s peaking in the 1999 elections, the FP , now purged of its liberal elements, entered a coalition with the VP led by Wolfgang Sch ssel that met international condemnation in 2000. This coalition triggered the regular ''Donnerstagsdemonstrationen'' (Thursday demonstrations) in protest against the government, which took place on the Heldenplatz, where Hitler had greeted the masses during the Anschluss. Haider's tactics and rhetoric, which were often criticised as sympathetic to Nazism, again forced Austrians to reconsider their relationship to the past.
But it is not J rg Haider alone who has made questionable remarks on Austria's past: J rg Haider's coalition partner the current Chancellor Wolfgang Sch ssel in an interview with the Jerusalem Post as late as 2000 stated that Austria was the first victim of Hitler Germany.
Literature
Tearing into the simplism of the ''victim theory'' and the time of the Austrofascism, Thomas Bernhard's last play, ''Heldenplatz'', was highly controversial even before it appeared on stage in 1988, fifty years after Hitler's visit. Bernhard's achievement was to make the elimination of references to Hitler's reception in Vienna emblematic of Austrian attempts to claim their history and culture under questionable criteria. Many politicians from all political factions called Bernhard a ''Nestbeschmutzer'' (so. damaging the reputation of his country) and openly demanded that the play should not be staged in Vienna's Burgtheater. Kurt Waldheim, who was at that time still Austrian president called the play ''a crude insult to the Austrian people''.
The Historical Commission and outstanding legal issues
In the context of the postwar Federal Republic of Germany, one encounters a ''Vergangenheitsbew ltigung'' ("struggle to come to terms with the past") that has been partially institutionalised, variably in literary, cultural, political, and educational contexts (its development and difficulties have not been trivial see, for example, the Historikerstreit). Austria formed a ''Historikerkommission'' ("Historian's Commission" or "Historical Commission") in 1998 with a mandate to review Austria's role in the Nazi expropriation of Jewish property from a scholarly rather than legal perspective, partly in response to continuing criticism of its handling of property claims. Its membership was based on recommendations from various quarters, including Simon Wiesenthal and Yad Vashem. The Commission delivered its report in 2003. Noted Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg refused to participate in the Commission and in an interview stated his strenuous objections in terms both personal and in reference to larger questions about Austrian culpability and liability, comparing what he to be relative inattention to the settlement governing the Swiss bank holdings of those who died or were displaced by the Holocaust:
blockquote
I personally would like to know why the WJC World Jewish Congress has hardly put any pressure on Austria, even as leading Nazis and SS leaders were Austrians, Hitler included... Immediately after the war, the US wanted to make the Russians withdraw from Austria, and the Russians wanted to keep Austria neutral, therefore there was a common interest to grant Austria victim status. And later Austria could cry poor though its per capita income is as high as Germany's. And, most importantly, the Austrian PR machinery works better. Austria has the opera ball, the imperial castle, Mozartkugeln a chocolate . Americans like that. And Austrians invest and export relatively little to the US, therefore they are less vulnerable to blackmail. In the meantime, they set up a commission in Austria to clarify what happened to Jewish property. Victor Klima, the former chancellor, has asked me to join. My father fought for Austria in the First World War and in 1939 he was kicked out of Austria. After the war they offered him ten dollars per month as compensation. For this reason I told Klima, no thank you, this makes me sick.
blockquote
The Simon Wiesenthal Center continues to criticise Austria (as recently as June 2005) for its alleged historical and ongoing unwillingness aggressively to pursue investigations and trials against Nazis for war crimes and crimes against humanity from the seventies onwards. Its 2001 report offered the following characterization:
blockquote
Given the extensive participation of numerous Austrians, including at the highest levels, in the implementation of the Final Solution and other Nazi crimes, Austria should have been a leader in the prosecution of Holocaust perpetrators over the course of the past four decades, as has been the case in Germany. Unfortunately relatively little has been achieved by the Austrian authorities in this regard and in fact, with the exception of the case of Dr. Heinrich Gross which was suspended this year under highly suspicious circumstances (he claimed to be medically unfit, but outside the court proved to be healthy) not a single Nazi war crimes prosecution has been conducted in Austria since the mid seventies.
blockquote
In 2003 the Center launched a worldwide effort named "Operation: Last Chance" in order to collect further information about those Nazis still alive that are potentially subject to prosecution. Although reports issued shortly thereafter credited Austria for initiating large scale investigations, there has been one case where criticism of Austrian authorities arose recently: The Center has put 92 year old Croatian Milivoj Asner on its 2005 top ten list. Asner fled to Austria in 2004 after Croatia announced it would start investigations in the case of war crimes he may have been involved in. In response to objections about Asner's continued freedom, Austria's federal government has deferred to either extradition requests from Croatia or prosecutorial actions from Klagenfurt, neither of which appears forthcoming (as of June 2005). Extradition is not an option since Asner also holds Austrian citizenship, having lived in the country from 1946 to 1991.
! to be completed
Austrian political and military leaders in Nazi Germany
Arthur Seyss Inquart
Ernst Kaltenbrunner
Odilo Globocnik
Amon G th
Lothar Rendulic
Alfred Ritter von Hubicki
Alexander L hr
Franz B hme
See also
''The Sound of Music'' (an account of the Anschluss, dramatized but based on actual events)
''The Great Dictator'' (a fictitious account of the invasion of "Osterlich" by "Tomania", modeled on the Anschluss)
Third Reich
Kurt Schuschnigg
History of Austria
Notes
! Instructions for adding a footnote:
NOTE: Footnotes in this article use names, not numbers. Please see Wikipedia:Footnote3 for details.
1) Assign your footnote a unique name, for example TheSun 9 December.
2) Add the macro to the body of the article, where you want the new footnote.
3) Take note of the name of the footnote that immediately proceeds yours in the article body.
4) Add to the list, immediately below the footnote you noted in step3.
5) Multiple footnotes to the same reference will not work: you must insert two uniquely named footnotes.
NOTE: It is important to add the Footnote in the right order in the list.
Until the German spelling reform of 1996, ''Anschluss'' was written ''Anschlu '' in German. (See also the article on .) In English language typography and style conventions, " " was often transliterated as "ss," making the spelling currently accepted in German a valid, if not predominant, option before 1996.
, MSN Encarta. (accessed 8 July 2005),, Britannica, (accessed 8 July 2005), some historical sources refer to the Anschluss as an annexation.
, MSN Encarta. (accessed 10 June 2005).
"," ''Wiener Zeitung'', 25 May 1998 (detailed article the on the events of the Anschluss, in German).
Ibid.
, Spartacus Schoolnet (reactions on the Anschluss).
"," Austrian Resistance Archive, Vienna, 1988 (accessed 10 June 2005).
Ibid.
See note 2 above.
See note 2 above.
Neville Chamberlain, "."
, October 1943 (full text of the Moscow Memorandum).
Gerald Stourzh, "," ''The New York Review of Books'' 34, no. 3 (February 1987).
"," The Nizkor Project.
"," The Nizkor Project.
, ''Salzburger Nachrichten'', 11 November 2000.
, Books and Writers (article on Bernhard with a short section on Heldenplatz).
.
Austrian Press and Information Service, 28 February 2003
as quoted by Norman Finkelstein's web site.
Efraim Zuroff, "," Simon Wiesenthal Center, Jerusalem (April 2002).
"," World Jewish Congress, 19 November 2004.
, Der Standard, September 23, 2005
! READ ME!! PLEASE DO NOT JUST ADD NEW NOTES AT THE BOTTOM. See the instructions above on ordering.
References
Books
Bukey, Evan Burr (1986). ''Hitler's Hometown: Linz, Austria, 1908 1945.'' Indiana University Press ISBN 0 253 32833 0.
Parkinson, F. (ed.) (1989). ''Conquering the Past: Austrian Nazism Yesterday and Today.'' Wayne State University Press. ISBN 0814320546.
Pauley, Bruce F. (1981). ''Hitler and the Forgotten Nazis: A History of Austrian National Socialism'' University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0807814563 .
Scheuch, Manfred (2005). ''Der Weg zum Heldenplatz: eine Geschichte der sterreichischen Diktatur. 1933 1938.'' ISBN 3825877124.
Schuschnigg, Kurt (1971). ''The brutal takeover: The Austrian ex Chancellor's account of the Anschluss of Austria by Hitler''. Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 0297003216.
Stuckel, Eva Maria (2001). '' sterreich, Monarchie, Operette, und Anschluss: Antisemtismus, Faschismus, und Nationalsozialismus im Fadenkreuz von Ingeborg Bachman und Elias Canetti.''
Electronic articles and journals
," ''Wiener Zeitung'', 25 May 1998 (detailed article the on the events of the Anschluss, in German).
," Austrian Resistance Archive, Vienna, 1988 (accessed 10 June 2005).
, MSN Encarta. (accessed 10 June 2005).
Buchner, A. From the Destruction of the Socialist Lager to National Socialist Coup Attempt (accessed 10 June 2005).
External links
Category:German loanwords
Category:History of Austria
Category:History of Germany
Category:Nazi Germany
Category:Vergangenheitsbew ltigung
bg:
da:Anschluss
de:Anschluss ( sterreich)
es:Anschluss
fi:Anschluss
fr:Anschluss
he:
ia:Anschluss
it:Anschluss
ja:
nl:Anschluss
pl:Anschluss Austrii
ru:
sl:Anschluss
sv:Anschluss
tr:Avusturyan n ilhak
uk:
Infobox Military Conflict
image
caption (clockwise from upper right) Confederate prisoners at Gettysburg Battle of Fort Hindman, Arkansas Rosecrans at Stones River, Tennessee
conflict American Civil War
partof
date 1861 1865
place Principally in the Southern United States
Southwestern regions
result Union victory Southern states reconstructed slavery abolished
combatant1 United Statesbrof Americabr
combatant2 Confederate Statesbrof Americabr
commander1 Abraham LincolnbrUlysses S. Grant
commander2 Jefferson DavisbrRobert E. Lee
strength1 1,556,678
strength2 1,064,200
casualties1 '''KIA:''' 110,100br'''Total dead:''' 359,500br'''Wounded:''' 275,200
casualties2 '''KIA:''' 74,500br'''Total dead:''' 198,500br'''Wounded:''' 137,000
The '''American Civil War''' (18611865) was a civil war between the United States of America, called the Union, and the Confederate States of America, formed by eleven Southern states that had secededsmallsmall 1 small small from the Union. The Union won a decisive victory, followed by a period of Reconstruction. The war produced more than 970,000 casualties (3 percent of population), including approximately 560,000 deaths. The causes of the war, the reasons for the outcome, and even the name of the war itself, are subjects of much controversy, even today.
Historiography: Multiple explanations of why War began
:''Main articles: Origins of the American Civil War, Timeline of events''
The '''origin of the American Civil War''' lay in the complex issues of slavery, politics, disagreements over the scope of States' rights versus federal power, expansionism, sectionalism, economics, modernization, and competing nationalism of the Antebellum period. Although there is little disagreement among historians on the details of the events that led to war, there is disagreement on exactly what caused what and the relative importance. There is no consensus on whether the war could have been avoided, or if it should have been avoided.
Failure to compromise
In 1854 the old political system broke down after passage of the Kansas Nebraska Act. The Whig Party disappeared, and the new Republican Party arose in its place. It was the nation's first major political party with only sectional appeal though it had much of the old Whig economic platform, its popularity rested on its commitment to stop the expansion of slavery into new territories. Open warfare in the Kansas Territory, the panic of 1857, and John Brown's raid on Harper's Ferry further heightened sectional tensions and helped Republicans sweep elections in 1860. In 1860, the election of Abraham Lincoln, who met staunch opposition from Southern slave owning interests, triggered Southern secession from the union. The new president decided to resort to arms, if necessary, to preserve the nation's territorial integrity.
Historians in the 1930s such as James G. Randall argued that the rise of mass democracy, the breakdown of the old two party system, and increasingly virulent and hostile sectional rhetoric made it highly unlikely, if not impossible, to bring about the compromises of the past (such as the Missouri Compromise and the Compromise of 1850) necessary to avoid crisis. Although numerous compromises were proposed, none were successful in reuniting the country. One possible "compromise" was peaceful secession agreed to by the United States, which was seriously discussed in late 1860and supported by many abolitionistsbut was rejected by both Buchanan's conservative Democrats and the Republican leadership.
Southern nationalism: Psychological nationhood
Most historians agree, following Ulrich B. Phillips, Avery Craven, and Eugene Genovese that the South had grown apart from the North psychologically and in terms of its value systems. One by one the common elements that bound the nation together were broken. For example the major Protestant denominations split along North South lines. Fewer travelers or students or businessmen went from one region to the other. The last common elements were the Constitution (which was in dispute after the Dred Scott ruling of 1857) the political parties (which split along regional lines in 1860), and Congress, which was in constant turmoil after 1856.
Slavery as a cause of the War
Focus on the slavery issue has been cyclical. It was considered the main cause in the 18601890 era. From 1900 to 1960, historians considered anti slavery agitation to be less important than constitutional, economic, and cultural issues. Since the 1960s historians have returned to an emphasis on slavery as a major cause of the war. Specifically, they note that the South insisted on protecting it and the North insisted on weakening it. A small but militant abolitionist movement existed in the North a matter of a few thousand advocates. Their insistence that slavery was a sin and slave owners were deeply guilty angered the South. Historians have looked at many slave owners and decided that they felt neither guilt nor shame, but were angry at what they considered unchristian hate speech from abolitionists. By the 1830s there was a widespread ideological defense of the "peculiar institution" everywhere in the South.
As territorial expansion forced the nation to confront the question of whether new territories were to become "slave" or "free," and as multiplying free states became a majority in the Union, the Slave Power in national politics waned.
Economics
The North and South did have different economies but they were complementary and not in competition. The South made money by exporting cotton (and other unique crops like tobacco). The North made money by exporting food and manufactured items. Many northern business interests were closely tied to the Southern economy and pleaded for union and compromise. Some Southerners thought they paid too much in tariffs but they themselves had written and voted for the tariff laws in effect.
The cotton growing export business or "King Cotton," as it was touted, was so important to the world economy, southerners argued, that they could stand alone. Indeed, being tied to the North was a hindrance and an economic burden. The South would do better by trading directly with Europe and avoiding extortionate Yankee middlemen.
Ideologies
In the view of many northern Republicans, the Slave Power ruled the South, not democracy. This "Slave Power" was a small group of very wealthy slave owners, especially cotton planters, who dominated the politics and society of the South. However, historians more recently have emphasized that the South was much more democratic than the Republicans of North believed.
Both North and South believed strongly to republican values of democracy and civic virtue. But their conceptualizations were diverging. Each side though the other was aggressive, and was violating both the Constitution and the core values of American republicanism. Nationalism was the dominant force in Europe in the 19th century and likewise in America. The South was much more explicit in defining nationalism as a regional characteristic. The North paid less attention to nationalism before 1860, but then focused its mind on it and stressed the whole country, North and South, was the unit of nationalism.
This economic differentiation had social and political consequences beyond the issue of slavery itself for instance, Pennsylvania politicians pushed for a protective tariff to help the iron industry, while the cotton exporting South wanted to keep the existing policy of nearly free trade.
At a deeper level industrialization in the Northeast and farming in the Midwest depended on free labor, which could not exist alongside slave labor, as Lincoln kept emphasizing. The nation had to be all free or all slave, said Lincoln.
(Historians Charles and Mary Beard went so far as to argue in 1928 that this sectional conflict was a "Second American Revolution"a revolutionary watershed in the rise of modern industrial society in the United States.)
States Rights
The States' rights debate cut across the issues. Southern politicians argued that the federal government had no power to prevent slaves from being carried into new territories, but they also demanded federal jurisdiction over slaves who escaped into the North Northern politicians took reversed, though equally contradictory, stances on these issues.
Slavery in the Territories
The specific political crisis that culminated in secession and civil war stemmed from a dispute over the expansion of slavery into new territories. The reason was that Congress had power over slavery in the territories, but not in the states. With new territories being formed especially Kansas the issue of slaver had to be confronted. This argument grew out of the acquisition of vast new lands during the Mexican War (184648). Free state politicians such as David Wilmot, who personally had no sympathy for abolitionism, feared that slaves would provide too much competition for free labor, and thus effectively keep free state migrants out of newly opened territories. Slaveholders felt that any ban on slaves in the territories was a discrimination against their peculiar form of property, and would undercut both the financial value of slaves and the institution itself. (Slaves comprised the second most valuable form of property in the South, after real estate.) In Congress, the end of the Mexican War was overshadowed by a fight over the Wilmot Proviso, a provision that Wilmot tried (and failed) to enact to bar slavery from all lands acquired in the conflict.
The dispute led to open warfare after the Kansas Territory was organized in the Kansas Nebraska Act of 1854. This act repealed the prohibition on slavery there under the Missouri Compromise of 1820, and put the fate of slavery in the hands of the territory's settlers, a process known as "popular sovereignty." Proslavery Missourians expected that Kansas, due west of their state, would naturally become a slave state, and were alarmed by an organized migration of antislavery New Englanders. Soon heavily armed "border ruffians" from Missouri battled antislavery forces under John Brown, among other leaders. Hundreds were killed or wounded. Southern congressmen, perceiving a Northern conspiracy to keep slavery out of Kansas, insisted that it be admitted as a slave state. Northerners, pointing to the large and growing majority of antislavery voters there, denounced this effort. By 1860, sectional divisions had grown deep and bitter.
'''br16th President (18611865)
Southern fears of Modernity
Southern secession was triggered by the election of Republican Abraham Lincoln because it was feared that he would make good on his promise to stop the expansion of slavery and put it on a course toward extinction. If not Lincoln, then sooner or later another Yankee, many Southerners said it was time to quit the Union. The slave states had lost the balance of power in the Electoral College and the Senate, and were facing a future as a perpetual minority. In a broader sense the North was rapidly modernizing its economy and its world view slavery had no role in modern America. Historian James McPherson (1983 p 283) explains:
Secession
Before Lincoln took office, seven states seceded from the Union, and established an independent Southern government, the Confederate States of America on February 9, 1861. They took control of federal forts and property within their boundaries, with little resistance from President Buchanan. By seceding, the rebel states gave up any claim to the Western territories that were in dispute, canceled any obligation for the North to return fugitive slaves to the Confederacy, and assured easy passage in Congress of many bills and amendments they had long opposed.
The Civil War began when, under orders from Confederate President Jefferson Davis, Confederate General P.G.T. Beauregard opened fire upon Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, on April 12, 1861. There were no casualties from enemy fire in this battle.
Division of the country
The Union States
There were 23 Union States: California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Wisconsin. The Union counted Virginia as well, and added Nevada and West Virginia. It added Tennessee, Louisiana, and other rebel states as soon as they were reconquered.
The territories of Colorado, Dakota, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington also fought on the Union side. There was a civil war inside the Oklahoma territory.
The Confederacy
Seven states seceded by March 1861:
South Carolina (December 21 1860),
Mississippi (January 9 1861),
Florida (January 10 1861),
Alabama (January 11 1861),
Georgia (January 19 1861),
Louisiana (January 26 1861),
Texas (February 1 1861).
These states of the Deep South, where slavery and cotton were most dominant, formed the Confederate States of America (February 4 1861), with Jefferson Davis as president, and a governmental structure closely modeled on the U.S. Constitution ''(see also: Confederate States Constitution)''.
gray, Confederate states green, Territories.
After the surrender of Fort Sumter, April 13, 1861, Lincoln called for troops from all states to put down the insurrection, resulting in the secession of four more states:
Virginia (April 17 1861),
Arkansas (May 6 1861),
North Carolina (May 20 1861), and
Tennessee (June 8 1861).
Border states
''Main article: Border states (Civil War)''
Along with the northwestern portion of Virginia (whose residents did not wish to secede and eventually entered the Union in 1863 as West Virginia), four of the five northernmost "slave states" (Maryland, Delaware, Missouri, and Kentucky) did not secede, and became known as the Border States. There was considerable anti war or "Copperhead" sentiment in the southern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and some men volunteered for Confederate service however much larger numbers, led by John A. Logan, joined the Union army.
Maryland had numerous pro Confederate officials, but after rioting in Baltimore and other events had prompted a Federal declaration of martial law, Union troops moved in, and arrested the pro Confederates. Both Missouri and Kentucky remained in the Union, but factions within each state organized governments in exile that were recognized by the CSA.
In Missouri, an elected convention on secession voted decisively to remain within the Union. However, pro Southern Governor Claiborne F. Jackson called out the state militia, which was attacked in St. Louis by federal forces under General Nathaniel Lyon, who chased the governor and the rest of the State Guard to the southwestern corner of the state. (''See also: Missouri secession'').
Although Kentucky did not secede, for a time it declared itself neutral. During a brief invasion by Confederate forces, Southern sympathizers organized a secession convention, inaugurated a Confederate Governor, and gained recognition from the Confederacy. However, the military occupation of Columbus by Confederate General Leonidas Polk in September 1861 turned general popular opinion in Kentucky against the Confederacy, and the state subsequently reaffirmed its loyal status and expelled the Confederate government.
Residents of the northwestern counties of Virginia organized a secession from Virginia and entered the Union in 1863 as West Virginia. Similar secessions were supported in some other areas of the Confederacy (such as eastern Tennessee), but were suppressed by declarations of martial law by the Confederacy.
! California not unique in having split sentiments
California was a free state and a part of the Union. Lincoln had won a plurality there, but there were a number of Southern sympathizers. 2 of its votes went to the Southern Democrat candidate, John C. Breckinridge. California's soldiers were kept under state control and were used to keep the land routes between the Mississippi and the state open. California gold helped finance the Union war effort.
Narrative summary: 1861 to Fort Sumter
Lincoln's victory in the presidential election of 1860 triggered South Carolina's secession from the Union. By February 1, 1861, six more Southern states had seceded. On February 7, the seven states adopted a provisional constitution for the Confederate States of America and established their capital at Montgomery, Alabama. The pre war February peace conference of 1861 met in Washington, as one last attempt to avoid war it failed. The remaining southern states as yet remained in the Union. Confederate forces seized all but three federal forts within their boundaries (they did not take Fort Sumter) President Buchanan made no military response, but governors in Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania began secretly buying weapons and training militia units to ready them for immediate action.
On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln was sworn in. In his inaugural address, he argued that the Constitution was a ''more perfect union'' than the earlier Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, that it was a binding contract, and called the secession "legally void". He stated he had no intent to invade southern states, but would use force to maintain possession of federal property. His speech closed with a plea for restoration of the bonds of union. The South did send delegations to Washington and offered to pay for the federal properties, but they were turned down. Lincoln refused to negotiate with any Confederate agents because he insisted the Confederacy was not a legitimate government.
On April 12, Confederate soldiers fired upon the Federal troops stationed at Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, until the troops surrendered. Lincoln called for all of the states in the Union to send troops to recapture the forts and preserve the Union. Most Northerners hoped that a quick victory for the Union would crush the nascent rebellion, and so Lincoln only called for volunteers for 90 days. Four states, Tennessee, Arkansas, North Carolina, andmost importantly, Virginiawhich had repeatedly rejected Confederate overtures now decided that they could not send forces against the seceding states. They seceded and to reward Virginia the Confederate capital was moved to Richmond, Virginia, a highly vulnerable location at the end of the supply line.
Even though the Southern states had seceded, there was considerable anti secessionist sentiment within several of the seceding states. Eastern Tennessee, in particular, was a hotbed for pro Unionism. Winston County, Alabama issued a resolution of secession from the state of Alabama. The ''Red Strings'' were a prominent Southern anti secession group.
Winfield Scott created the Anaconda Plan to win the war with as little bloodshed as possible. His idea was that a Union blockade would strangle the rebel economy, then capture of the Mississippi would split the South. Lincoln adopted the plan but overruled Scott's warnings against an immediate attack on Richmond.
Naval war and blockade
Union blockade and Confederate States Navy
In May 1861 Lincoln proclaimed the Union blockade of all southern ports, which shut down nearly all international traffic and most local port to port traffic. Although few naval battles were fought and few men were killed, the blockade shut down King Cotton and ruined the southern economy. British investors built small, very fast "blockade runners" that brought in military supplies (and civilian luxuries) from Cuba and the Bahamas and took out some cotton and tobacco. When the blockade captured one the ship and cargo were sold and the proceeds given to the Union sailors. The crews were British, so when they were captured they were released and not held as prisoners of war. The most famous naval battle was the Battle of Hampton Roads (often called "the Battle of the ''Monitor'' and the ''Merrimac''") in March 1862, in which Confederate efforts to break the blockade were frustrated. Other naval battles included Island No. 10, Memphis, Drewry's Bluff, Arkansas Post, and Mobile Bay.
Eastern Theater 18611863
Because of the fierce resistance of a few initial Confederate forces at Manassas, Virginia, in July 1861, a march by Union troops under the command of Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell on the Confederate forces there was halted in the First Battle of Bull Run, or ''First Manassas'', whereupon they were forced back to Washington, D.C., by Confederate troops under the command of Generals Joseph E. Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard. It was in this battle that Confederate General Thomas Jackson received the name of "Stonewall" because he stood like a stone wall against Union troops. Alarmed at the loss, and in an attempt to prevent more slave states from leaving the Union, the U.S. Congress passed the Crittenden Johnson Resolution on July 25 of that year, which stated that the war was being fought to preserve the Union and not to end slavery.
Major General George B. McClellan took command of the Union Army of the Potomac on July 26 (he was briefly general in chief of all the Union armies, but was subsequently relieved of that post in favor of Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck), and the war began in earnest in 1862.
Upon the strong urging of President Lincoln to begin offensive operations, McClellan invaded Virginia in the spring of 1862 by way of the peninsula between the York River and James River, southeast of Richmond. Although McClellan's army reached the gates of Richmond in the Peninsula Campaign, Joseph E. Johnston halted his advance at the Battle of Seven Pines, then Robert E. Lee defeated him in the Seven Days Battles and forced his retreat. McClellan was stripped of many of his troops to reinforce John Pope's Union Army of Virginia. Pope was beaten spectacularly by Lee in the Northern Virginia Campaign and the Second Battle of Bull Run in August.
Emboldened by Second Bull Run, the Confederacy made its first invasion of the North, when General Lee led 55,000 men of the Army of Northern Virginia across the Potomac River into Maryland on September 5. Lincoln then restored Pope's troops to McClellan. McClellan and Lee fought at the Battle of Antietam near Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17 1862, the bloodiest single day in American history. Lee's army, checked at last, returned to Virginia before McClellan could destroy it. Antietam is considered a Union victory because it halted Lee's invasion of the North and provided justification for Lincoln to announce his Emancipation Proclamation.
When the cautious McClellan failed to follow up on Antietam, he was replaced by Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside. Burnside suffered near immediate defeat at the Battle of Fredericksburg on December 13 1862, when over ten thousand Union soldiers were killed or wounded. After the battle, Burnside was replaced by Maj. Gen. Joseph "Fighting Joe" Hooker. Hooker, too, proved unable to defeat Lee's army despite outnumbering the Confederates by more than two to one, he was humiliated in the Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863. He was replaced by Maj. Gen. George G. Meade during Lee's second invasion of the North, in June. Meade defeated Lee at the Battle of Gettysburg (July 13, 1863), the largest battle in North American history, which is sometimes considered the war's turning point. Lee's army suffered 28,000 casualties (versus Meade's 23,000), again forcing it to retreat to Virginia, never to launch a full scale invasion of the North again. Lincoln was angry that Meade failed to intercept Lee's retreat, and decided to turn to the Western Theater for new leadership.
On the use of balloons, see Aerial warfare section on the American Civil War.
Western Theater 18611863
While the Confederate forces had numerous successes in the Eastern theater, they crucially failed in the West. They were driven from Missouri early in the war as result of the Battle of Pea Ridge. Leonidas Polk's invasion of Kentucky enraged the citizens there who previously had declared neutrality in the war, turning that state against the Confederacy.
Nashville, Tennessee, fell to the Union early in 1862. Most of the Mississippi was opened with the taking of Island No. 10 and New Madrid, Missouri, and then Memphis, Tennessee. New Orleans, Louisiana, was captured in May 1862, allowing the Union forces to begin moving up the Mississippi as well. Only the fortress city of Vicksburg, Mississippi, prevented unchallenged Union control of the entire river.
Braxton Bragg's second Confederate invasion of Kentucky was repulsed by Don Carlos Buell at the confused and bloody Battle of Perryville and he was narrowly defeated by William S. Rosecrans at the Battle of Stones River in Tennessee.
The one clear Confederate victory in the West was the Battle of Chickamauga in Georgia, near the Tennessee border, where Bragg, reinforced by the corps of James Longstreet (from Lee's army in the east), defeated Rosecrans, despite the heroic defensive stand of George Henry Thomas, and forced him to retreat to Chattanooga, which Bragg then besieged.
The Union's key strategist and tactician in the west was Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, who won victories at: Forts Henry and Donelson, by which the Union seized control of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers Shiloh the Battle of Vicksburg, cementing Union control of the Mississippi River and considered one of the turning points of the war and the Battle of Chattanooga, Tennessee, driving Confederate forces out of Tennessee and opening an invasion route to Atlanta and the heart of the Confederacy.
Trans Mississippi Theater 18611865
Though geographically isolated from the battles to the east, a number of small scale military actions took place west of the Mississippi River. Confederate incursions into Arizona and New Mexico were repulsed in 1862. Guerilla activity turned much of Missouri and Indian Territory (Oklahoma) into a battleground. Late in the war the Federal Red River Campaign was a failure. Texas remained in Confederate hands throughout the war, but was cut off after the capture of Vicksburg in 1863 gave the Union control of the Mississippi River.
End of the War 18641865
, first and only President of the Confederate States of America
At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made Grant commander of all Union armies. Grant made his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac, and put Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman in command of most of the western armies. Grant understood the concept of total war and believed, along with Lincoln and Sherman, that only the utter defeat of Confederate forces and their economic base would bring an end to the war. He devised a coordinated strategy that would strike at the heart of Confederacy from multiple directions: Generals Grant, Meade, and Benjamin Butler would move against Lee near Richmond General Franz Sigel (and later Philip Sheridan) would invade the Shenandoah Valley General Sherman would and capture Atlanta and march to the sea Generals George Crook and William W. Averell would operate against railroad supply lines in West Virginia and General Nathaniel Banks would capture Mobile, Alabama.
Union forces in the East attempted to maneuver past Lee and fought several battles during that phase ("Grant's Overland Campaign") of the Eastern campaign. An attempt to outflank Lee from the south failed under Butler, who was trapped inside the Bermuda Hundred river bend. Grant was tenacious and, despite astonishing losses (over 66,000 casualties in six weeks), kept pressing Lee's Army of Northern Virginia back to Richmond. He pinned down the Confederate army in the Siege of Petersburg, where the two armies engaged in trench warfare for over nine months.
Grant finally found a commander, General Philip Sheridan, aggressive enough to prevail in the Valley Campaigns of 1864. Sheridan proved to be more than a match for Jubal Early, and defeated him in a series of battles, including a final decisive defeat at Cedar Creek, Sheridan then proceeded to destroy the agricultural base of the Valley, a strategy similar to the tactics Sherman would later employ in Georgia.
Meanwhile, Sherman marched from Chattanooga to Atlanta, defeating Confederate Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John B. Hood. The fall of Atlanta, on September 2, 1864, was a significant factor in the re election of Abraham Lincoln, as President of the Union. Leaving Atlanta, and his base of supplies, Sherman's army marched with an unclear destination, laying waste to about 20 of the farms in Georgia in his celebrated "March to the Sea", and reaching the Atlantic Ocean at Savannah, Georgia in December 1864. Burning plantations as they went, Sherman's army was followed by thousands of freed slaves. When Sherman turned north through South Carolina and North Carolina to approach the Virginia lines from the south, it was the end for Lee and his men, and for the Confederacy.
Lee attempted to escape from the besieged Petersburg and link up with Johnston in North Carolina, but he was overtaken by Grant. He surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia on April 9, 1865, at Appomattox Court House. Johnston surrendered his troops to Sherman shortly thereafter at a local family's farmhouse in Durham, North Carolina. The Battle of Palmito Ranch, fought on May 13, 1865, in the far south of Texas, was the last Civil War land battle and ended, ironically, with a Confederate victory. All Confederate land forces surrendered by June 1865.
Analysis of the outcome
Why the Union prevailed (or why the Confederacy was defeated) in the Civil War has been a subject of extensive analysis and debate.
Could the South have won? A significant number of scholars believe that the Union held an insurmountable advantage over the Confederacy in terms of industrial strength, population, and the determination to win. Confederate actions, they argue, could only delay defeat. Southern historian Shelby Foote expressed this view succinctly in Ken Burns's television series on the Civil War: "I think that the North fought that war with one hand behind its back.... If there had been more Southern victories, and a lot more, the North simply would have brought that other hand out from behind its back. I don't think the South ever had a chance to win that War." Ward 1990 p 272
Other historians, however, suggest that the South had a chance to win its independence. As James McPherson has observed, the Confederacy remained on the defensive, which required fewer military resources. The Union, committed to the strategic offensive, faced enormous manpower demands that it often had difficulty meeting. War weariness among Union civilians mounted along with casualties, in the long years before Union advantages proved decisive. Thus, the inevitability of Union victory remains hotly contested among scholars.
The goals were not symmetric. To win independence the South had to convince the North it could not win, but it did not have to invade the North. To restore the Union the North had to conquer vast stretches of territory. In the short run (a matter of months) the two sides were evenly matched. But in the long run (a matter of years) the North had advantages that increasingly came into play.
Both sides had long term advantages but the Union had more of them. The Union had to control the entire coastline, defeat all the main Confederate armies, seize Richmond, and control most of the population centers. As the occupying force they had to station hundreds of thousands of soldiers to control railroads, supply lines, and major towns and cites. The long term advantages widely credited by historians to have contributed to the Union's success include:
The more industrialized economy of the North, which aided in the production of arms, munitions and supplies, as well as finances, and transportation. The graph shows the relative advantage of the USA over the CSA.
A party system that enabled the Republicans to mobilize soldiers and support at the grass roots, even when the war became unpopular. The Confederacy deliberately did not use parties.
The Union population was 22 million and the South 9 million in 1861 the disparity grew as the Union controlled more and more southern territory with garrisons, and cut off the trans Mississippi part of the Confederacy.
Excellent railroad links between Union cities, which allowed for the quick and cheap movement of troops and supplies. Transportation was much slower and more difficult in the South which was unable to augment its much smaller system or repair damage, or even perform routine maintenance.
The Union devoted much more of its resources to medical needs, thereby overcoming the unhealthy disease environment that sickened (and killed) more soldiers than combat did.
The Union at the start controlled over 80 of the shipyards, steamships, river boats, and the Navy. It augmented these by a massive shipbuilding program. This enabled the Union to control the river systems and to blockade the entire southern coastline.
The Union's more established government, particularly a mature executive branch which accumulated even greater power during wartime, may have resulted in less regional infighting and a more streamlined conduct of the war. Failure of Davis to maintain positive and productive relationships with state governors damaged the Confederate president's ability to draw on regional resources.
The Confederacy's tactic of engaging in major battles at the cost of heavy manpower losses, when it could not easily replace its losses.
The Confederacy's to fully use its advantages in guerrilla warfare against Union communication and transportation infrastructure. However, as Lee warned, such warfare would prove devastating to the South, and (with the exception of Confederate partisans in Missouri) Confederate leaders shrank from it.
Despite the Union's many tactical blunders like the Seven Days Battle, those commited by Confederate generals, such as Lee's miscalculations at the Battle of Gettysburg and Battle of Antietam, were far more seriousif for no other reason than that the Confederates could so little afford the losses.
Lincoln proved more adept than Davis in replacing unsuccessful generals with better ones.
Strategically the location of the capital Richmond tied Lee to a highly exposed position at the end of supply lines. (Loss of Richmond, everyone realized, meant loss of the war.)
Lincoln grew as a grand strategist, in contrast to Davis. The Confederacy never developed an overall strategy. It never had a plan to deal with the blockade. Davis failed to respond in a coordinated fashion to serious threats, such as Grant's campaign against Vicksburg in 1863 (in the face of which, he allowed Lee to invade Pennsylvania).
The Confederacy's failure to win diplomatic or military support from any foreign powers. Its King Cotton misperception of the world economy led to bad diplomacy, such as the refusal to ship cotton before the blockade started.
Most important, the Union had the will to win, and leaders like Lincoln, Seward, Stanton, Grant, and Sherman would do whatever it took to achieve victory. The Confederacy, as Beringer et al (1986) argue, may have lacked the total commitment needed to win. It took time, however, for leaders such as Grant, Sherman, and Sheridan to emerge in the meantime, Union public opinion wavered, and Lincoln worried about losing the election of 1864, until victories in the Shenandoah Valley and Atlanta made victory seem likely.
Major land battles
There were as many as 10,000 hostile engagements during the war. The costliest and most significant are listed in Battles of the American Civil War.
Civil War leaders and soldiers
and Jefferson Davis at Vicksburg National Military Park.
One of the reasons that the U.S. Civil War wore on as long as it did and the battles were so fierce was that most important generals on both sides had formerly served in the United States Armysome, including Ulysses S. Grant and Robert E. Lee, during the Mexican American War between 1846 and 1848. Most were graduates of the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Southern military commanders and strategists included Jefferson Davis, Robert E. Lee, Joseph E. Johnston, Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson, James Longstreet, P.G.T. Beauregard, John Mosby, Braxton Bragg, John Bell Hood, James Ewell Brown (JEB) Stuart, William Mahone, Judah P. Benjamin, Jubal Early, and Nathan Bedford Forrest.
Northern military commanders and strategists included Abraham Lincoln, Edwin M. Stanton, Ulysses S. Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, George H. Thomas, George B. McClellan, Henry W. Halleck, Joseph Hooker, Ambrose Burnside, Irvin McDowell, Winfield Scott, Philip Sheridan, George Crook, George Armstrong Custer, George G. Meade, and Winfield Hancock
After 1980, scholarly attention turned to ordinary soldiers, and to women and African Americans involved with the War. As James McPherson observed "The profound irony of the Civil War was that Confederate and Union soldiers ... interpreted the heritage of 1776 in opposite ways. Confederates fought for liberty and independence from what they regarded as a tyrannical government Unionists fought to preserve the nation created by the founders from dismemberment and destruction."(McPherson 1994 p 24)
The Question of Slavery
Given the painfulness of the historical memory of slavery for many Americans, its role in the war remains controversial to this day. To understand its place in the conflict, it is necessary to divide the issue in two: slavery as a motivation for secession, and abolition as a Union war aim.
In the weeks and months preceding the secession of the Confederate states, Southern leaders spoke openly about their desire to preserve slavery, and their fears for the "peculiar institution" if the South remained within the Union. Almost all of the ordinances of secession cited the preservation of slavery as a primary, even the foremost, reason for departure from the Union. And yet many individual Southern soldiers fought for reasons quite apart from the defense of slavery: to protect their families and communities, to defend their home states, and out of a nascent sense of nationality.
On the Union side, Lincoln initially declared his purpose in prosecuting the war to be the preservation of the Union, not emancipation. He had no wish to alienate the thousands of slaveholders in the Union border states. The long war, however, had a radicalizing effect on federal policies. With the Emancipation Proclamation, announced in September 1862 and put into effect four months later, Lincoln adopted the abolition of the Slave Power as a second missionthat is slaves owned by rebels had to be taken away from them and freed. One goal was to destroy the economic basis of the Confederate leadership class, and another goal was to actually liberate the 4 million slaves, which was accomplished by 1865.
The Emancipation Proclamation declared all slaves held in territory then under Confederate control to be "then, thenceforth, and forever free," but did not affect slaves in areas under Union control. It did, however, show the Union that slavery's days were numbered, increasing abolitionist support in the North. The border states (except Kentucky) abolished slavery on their own.
Foreign diplomacy
Because of the Confederacy's attempt to create a new state, recognition and support from the European powers were critical to its prospects. The Union, under Secretary of State William Henry Seward attempted to block the Confederacy's efforts in this sphere. The Confederates hoped that the importance of the cotton trade to Europe (the idea of cotton diplomacy) and shortages caused by the war, along with early military victories, would enable them to gather increasing European support and force a turn away from neutrality.
President Lincoln's decision to announce a blockade of the Confederacy, a clear act of war, enabled Britain, followed by other European powers, to announce their neutrality in the dispute. This enabled the Confederacy to begin to attempt to gain support and funds in Europe. President Jefferson Davis had picked Robert Toombs of Georgia as his first Secretary of State. Toombs, having little knowledge in foreign affairs, was replaced several months later by Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia, another choice with little suitability. Ultimately, on March 17, 1862, Davis selected Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana as Secretary of State, who although having more international knowledge and legal experience with international slavery disputes still failed in the end to create a dynamic foreign policy for the Confederacy.
The first attempts to achieve European recognition of the Confederacy were dispatched on February 25, 1861 and led by William Lowndes Yancey, Pierre A. Rost, and Ambrose Dudley Mann. The British foreign minister Lord John Russell met with them, and the French foreign minister Edouard Thouvenel received the group unofficially. However, at this point, the two countries had agreed to coordinate and cooperate and would not make any rash moves.
Charles Francis Adams proved particularly adept as ambassador to Britain for the Union, and Britain was reluctant to boldly challenge the Union's blockade. The Confederacy also attempted to initiate propaganda in Europe through journalists Henry Hotze and Edwin De Leon in Paris and London. However, public opinion against slavery created a political liability for European politicians, especially in Britain. A significant challenge in Anglo Union relations was also created by the Trent Affair, involving the Union boarding of a British mail steamer to seize James M. Mason and John Slidell, Confederate diplomats sent to Europe. However, the Union was able to smooth over the problem to some degree.
As the war continued, in late 1862, the British considered initiating an attempt to mediate the conflict. However, the Union victory in the Battle of Antietam caused them to delay this decision. Additionally, the issuing of the Emancipation Proclamation further reinforced the political liability of supporting the Confederacy. As the war continued, the Confederacy's chances with Britain grew more hopeless, and they focused increasingly on France. Napol on III proposed to offer mediation in January 1863, but this was dismissed by Seward. Despite some sympathy for the Confederacy, France's own concerns in Mexico ultimately deterred them from substantially antagonizing the Union. As the Confederacy's situation grew more and more tenuous and their pleas increasingly ignored, President Davis sent Duncan F. Kenner to Europe, in November 1864, to test whether a promised Confederate emancipation of its slaves could lead to possible recognition. The proposal was strictly rejected by both Britain and France.
Aftermath
, Tennessee depicts a Union and Confederate soldier shaking hands.
Northern leaders agreed that the war would be over when Confederate nationalism was dead, and slavery was dead. They disagreed sharply on how to identify these goals. They also disagreed on the degree of federal control that should be imposed on the South.
The fighting ended with the surrender of all the Confederate forces. There was no significant guerrilla warfare. Many senior Confederate leaders escaped to Europe, but Davis was captured and imprisoned, but never brought to trial. The question became how much the Union could trust the ex Confederates to be truly loyal to the United States. The second main question in Reconstruction dealt with the destruction of slavery. The XIII Amendment (1865) officially abolished it legally, but the issue was whether black codes indicated a sort of semi slavery, and whether Freedmen should have the vote to protect those rights.
In 1867 Radicals in Congress pushed aside President Johnson and imposed new rules. Freedmen gained the right to vote and formed Republican political coalitions that took control of each state for varying periods. One by one the white conservatives or "Redeemers" gained back control of their states, often through lethal force. The final three were redeemed by the Compromise of 1877. After that the hatreds between North and South rapidly diminished until by 1900 the nation was no longer divided by the war, though it did remain divided by race.
Ghosts of the conflict still persist in America. For decades after the war, Northern politicians "waved the bloody shirt," bringing up memories of the Civil War as an electoral tactic, while the "solid South" as a block in national politics was built on memories of the war and a determination to maintain segregation. The Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s had its neoabolitionist roots in the failure of Reconstruction. A few debates surrounding the legacy of the war continue, especially regarding memorials and celebrations of Confederate heroes and battle flags. The question is a deep and troubling one: Americans with Confederate ancestors cherish the memory of their bravery and determination, yet their cause remains one ultimately tied to the shameful history of African American slavery.
Further reading
Overviews
Beringer, Richard E., Archer Jones, and Herman Hattaway, ''Why the South Lost the Civil War'' (1986) analysis of factors
Catton, Bruce, ''The Civil War'', American Heritage, 1960, ISBN 0 8281 0305 4, illustrated narrative
Donald, David ed. ''Why the North Won the Civil War'' (1977) (ISBN: 0020316607), short interpretive essays
Donald, David et al. ''The Civil War and Reconstruction'' (latest edition 2001) 700 page survey
Eicher, David J., ''The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War'', Simon Schuster, 2001, ISBN 0 684 84944 5.
Fellman, Michael et al. ''This Terible War: The Civil War and its Aftermath'' (2003), 400 page survey
Esposito, Vincent J. , these maps are online
Foote, Shelby. ''The Civil War: A Narrative'' (3 volumes), Random House, 1974, ISBN 0 394 74913 8. Highly detailed narrative covering all fronts
McPherson, James M. ''Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era'' (1988), survey Pulitzer prize
Mark E. Neely Jr. "Was the Civil War a Total War?" ''Civil War History'', Vol. 50, 2004 pp 434 in JSTOR
Nevins, Allan. ''Ordeal of the Union'', an 8 volume set (1947 1971). the most detailed narrative
1. Fruits of Manifest Destiny, 1847 1852 2. A House Dividing, 1852 1857 3. Douglas, Buchanan, and Party Chaos, 1857 1859 4. Prologue to Civil War, 1859 1861 5. The Improvised War, 1861 1862 6. War Becomes Revolution, 1862 1863 7. The Organized War, 1863 1864 8. The Organized War to Victory, 1864 1865
Rhodes, James Ford. , Pulitzer Prize a short version of his 5 volume history
Ward, Geoffrey C. ''The Civil War'' (Alfred Knopf, 1990), based on PBS series by Ken Burns visual emphasis
Weigley, Russell Frank. ''A Great Civil War: A Military and Political History, 1861 1865'' (2004) primarily military
Reference books and bibliographies
Blair, Jayne E. ''The Essential Civil War: A Handbook to the Battles, Armies, Navies And Commanders'' (2006)
Carter, Alice E. and Richard Jensen. ''The Civil War on the Web: A Guide to the Very Best Sites '' 2nd ed. (2003)
Current, Richard N., et al eds. ''Encyclopedia of the Confederacy'' (1993) (4 Volume set also 1 vol abridged version) (ISBN: 0132759918)
Faust, Patricia L. (ed.) ''Historical Times Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Civil War'' (1986) (ISBN: 0061812617) 2000 short entries
Eicher, David J., ''The Civil War in Books: An Analytical Bibliography'', University of Illinois, 1997, ISBN 0 252 02273 4
Heidler, David Stephen. ''Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History'' (2002), 1600 entries in 2700 pages in 5 vol or 1 vol editions
Wagner, Margaret E. Gary W. Gallagher, and Paul Finkelman, eds. ''The Library of Congress Civil War Desk Reference'' (2002)
Woodworth, Steven E. ed. ''American Civil War: A Handbook of Literature and Research'' (1996) (ISBN: 0313290199), 750 pages of historiography and bibliography
Biographies
Eicher, John H., Eicher, David J., ''Civil War High Commands'', Stanford University Press, 2001, ISBN 0 8047 3641 3
Freeman, Douglas S., (4 volumes), Scribners, 1934
Freeman, Douglas S., ''Lee's Lieutenants: A Study in Command'' (3 volumes), Scribners, 1946, ISBN 0 684 85979 3
Smith, Jean Edward, ''Grant'', Simon and Shuster, 2001, ISBN 0 684 84927 5
Warner, Ezra J., ''Generals in Blue: Lives of the Union Commanders'', Louisiana State University Press, 1964, ISBN 0 8071 0882 7
Warner, Ezra J., ''Generals in Gray: Lives of the Confederate Commanders'', Louisiana State University Press, 1959, ISBN 0 8071 0823 5
Soldiers
Frank, Joseph Allan and George A. Reaves. ''Seeing the Elephant: Raw Recruits at the Battle of Shiloh'' (1989)
Hess, Earl J. ''The Union Soldier in Battle: Enduring the Ordeal of Combat'' (1997)
McPherson, James. ''What They Fought For, 1861 1865'' (Louisiana State University Press, 1994)
McPherson, James. ''For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought in the Civil War '' (1998)
Wiley, Bell Irvin. ''The Life of Johnny Reb: The Common Soldier of the Confederacy'' (1962) (ISBN: 0807104752)
Wiley, Bell Irvin. ''Life of Billy Yank: The Common Soldier of the Union'' (1952) (ISBN: 0807104760)
Primary sources
U.S. War Dept., , U.S. Government Printing Office, 18801901. 70 very large volumes of letters and reports written by both armies. Online at
Bedwell, Randall, ''War is All Hell: A Collection of Civil War Quotations'', Cumberland House Publishing, 1999, ISBN 1 58182 419 X
Commager, Henry Steele (ed.). ''The Blue and the Gray. The Story of the Civil War as Told by Participants.'' (1950), often reprinted
Eisenschiml, Otto Ralph Newman eds. ''The American Iliad: The Epic Story of the Civil War as Narrated by Eyewitnesses and Contemporaries'' (1947)
Hesseltine, William B. ed. ''The Tragic Conflict: The Civil War and Reconstruction'' (1962)
Woodword, C. Vann, Ed., ''Mary Chesnut's Civil War'', Yale University Press, 1981, ISBN 0 300 02979 9 Pulitzer Prize
Novels about the war
Crane, Stephen, ''The Red Badge of Courage''
Doctorow, E.L., ''The March''
Frazier, Charles, ''Cold Mountain''
Mitchell, Margaret, ''Gone with the Wind''
Reed, Ishmael, ''Flight to Canada''
Shaara, Jeffrey, ''Gods and Generals''
Shaara, Jeffrey, ''The Last Full Measure''
Shaara, Michael, ''The Killer Angels''
Street, James, ''By Valour and Arms''
Verne, Jules, ''Texar's Revenge, or, North Against South'' (''Nord Contre Sud'')
Vidal, Gore, ''Lincoln''
Films about the war
''The Birth of a Nation'' (1915)
''Gone With the Wind'' (1939)
''The Good, the Bad and the Ugly'' (1966)
''The Blue and the Gray''(1982)
''Glory'' (1989)
''Gettysburg'' (1993)
''Gods and Generals'' (2003)
''Cold Mountain'' (2003)
Documentaries about the war
''The Civil War'', directed by Ken Burns
See also
African Americans in the Civil War
California and the Civil War
Canada and the American Civil War
Casualties of the American Civil War
Illinois in the Civil War
Military history of the Confederate States
Military history of the United States
National Civil War Museum
Naming the American Civil War
List of American Civil War topics
List of people associated with the American Civil War
Official Records of the American Civil War
Origins of the American Civil War
Photography and photographers of the American Civil War
Rail transport in the American Civil War
U.S. Congress Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War
Union Army Balloon Corps
Union blockade
External links
at the National Archives
Civil War Research Discussion Group Containing 1500 Links And 400 Articles.
at the National Park Service
, a PBS documentary by Ken Burns
Individual state's contributions to the Civil War: , , , , ,
State declarations of the causes of secession: , , ,
A project to map out sites related to the Civil War in Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina
in Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin
A digital collection of first person narrative accounts from Wisconsin soldiers and citizens, documenting their wartime experiences.
. One of ''World Book Encyclopedia'''s monthly features, this one on the American Civil War.
Category:Civil wars
Category:Emergency laws
Category:Rebellions in the United States
Category:Wars of the United States
ast:Guerra de Secesi n
bs:Ameri ki gra anski rat
ca:Guerra civil dels Estats Units
cs:Americk ob ansk v lka
da:Den amerikanske borgerkrig
de:Sezessionskrieg
es:Guerra de Secesi n
eo:Usona Enlanda Milito
fr:Guerre de S cession
ko:
hr:Ameri ki gra anski rat
ia:Guerra civil american
it:Guerra civile americana
he:
hu:Amerikai polg rh bor
mr:
nl:Amerikaanse burgeroorlog
nds:Amerikaansche B rgerorlog
ja:
no:Den amerikanske borgerkrigen
nn:Borgarkrigen i USA
pl:Wojna secesyjna
pt:Guerra Civil Americana
ru:
sh:Ameri ki gra anski rat
simple:American Civil War
sk:Americk ob ianska vojna
sl:Ameri ka dr avljanska vojna
fi:Yhdysvaltojen sis llissota
sv:Amerikanska inb rdeskriget
th:
zh:
.
'''Andy Warhol''' (August 6, 1928 February 22, 1987) was an American painter, filmmaker, publisher, actor, and a major figure in the Pop Art movement.
Biography
Warhol was born as '''Andrew Warhola''' in Forest City, Pennsylvania. His parents, Ondrej (Andrew) Warhola and Julia Zavacky, were working class immigrants of Ruthenian ethnicity from Mikova, in northeast Slovakia his father worked in the coal mines of Pennsylvania. The family was Catholic but Warhol's mother had a Jewish grandmother.
Warhol showed early artistic talent and studied commercial art at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. In 1949 he moved to New York City and began a successful career in magazine illustration and advertising. He became well known mainly for his whimsical ink drawings of shoes done in a loose, blotted style.
In the 1960s, Warhol began to make paintings of famous American products such as Campbell's soup cans and Coca Cola. He switched to silkscreen prints, seeking not only to make art of mass produced items, but to mass produce the art itself. He said that he wanted to be like a robot. He hired and supervised "art workers" engaged in making prints, shoes, films, books and other items at his studio, ''The Factory'', located on Union Square in New York City. Warhol's body of work furthermore includes commissioned portraits and commercials.
A lot of Warhol's works revolve around the concept of Americana and American culture. He painted money, dollar signs, food, groceries, women's shoes, celebrities, and newspaper clippings. To him, these subjects represented American cultural values. For instance, Coca Cola represents democratic equality because
:"What s great about this country is that America started the tradition where the richest consumers buy essentially the same things as the poorest. You can be watching TV and see Coca Cola, and you know that the President drinks Coke, Liz Taylor drinks Coke, and just think, you can drink Coke, too. A Coke is a Coke and no amount of money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All the Cokes are the same and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President knows it, the bum knows it, and you know it."
He used popular imagery and methods to visualize the American cultural identity of the 20th century. This popular redefinition of American culture is a theme and result of Warhol's art. Because American culture has had great international influence, Warhol did as well.
Outside of the art world, Andy Warhol is best known for saying that "In the future, everyone will be world famous for 15 minutes." He later told reporters, humorously, "My new line is, 'In fifteen minutes everybody will be famous.'"
Socialite and Recluse
Warhol used to socialize at Serendipity and Studio 54, nightclubs in New York City. Warhol was generally regarded as quiet, shy, and as a meticulous observer. More than one person jokingly referred to him as "death warmed over."
Warhol was openly gay, rare for celebrities of his stature at the time. Many people think of Warhol as asexual and as merely a voyeur, but these notions have been debunked by biographers (like Fred Guiles), scholars (e.g. Richard Meyer), personal accounts of relationships by ex lovers such as Jed Johnson and Billy Name, and by the overtly campy and homoerotic nature of his work itself. Throughout his career, Warhol produced erotic photography and drawings of male nudes. Many of his most famous works (portraits of Liza Minelli, Judy Garland, Elizabeth Taylor, and films like "My Hustler", "Blow Job", and "Lonesome Cowboys") draw from gay underground culture and or openly explore the complexity of sexuality and desire. In fact, many of his films premiered in gay porn theaters. The first works that he submitted to a gallery in the pursuit of a career as an artist were, in fact, homoerotic drawings of male nudes. They were rejected for being too openly gay.
A meticulous collector, he organized almost every piece of paper, fan mailafter taking off the stampsand magazine related to his fame along with personal notes, gay pornography and found artifacts into hundreds of numbered boxes and set them aside, never to open them again. Warhol referred to these boxes as his "time capsule". Many exist today and are available for research at his Pittsburgh museum. Warhol's house was filled to the brim with his collected art, artifacts, and Americana.
Many of his later commissioned portraits were a direct or indirect result of this networking. As a famous artist, Warhol and his Factory attracted and facilitated many "groupies" and friends that Warhol would include in films and happenings. Warhol promoted these factory regulars to fame, creating the Warhol superstars. They would appear in and help him make his work, play in his movies, write his books, hang out and generally become his following.
When Warhol was asked to give a series of university lectures that he didn't feel like doing, one of his friends put on a wig and white make up, and pretended to be him by sitting quietly on the stage. Other Superstars explained Warhol's work to the audience, and urged them to drop out of college. The University eventually found out Warhol's "fraud" and the following dispute had to be settled with a refund.
Warhol would regularly volunteer at the homeless shelters in New York, particularly during the busier times of the year. He described himself as a religious person, although not fully accepted by religion because of his homosexuality. Many of his later works contain almost hidden religious themes or subjects, and a body of religious themed works was found posthumously in his estate.
Shooting
On June 3, 1968, Valerie Solanas, a Factory regular, entered Warhol's studio and fired three shots at Warhol, nearly killing him. Although the first two rounds missed, the third passed through Warhol's left lung, spleen, stomach, liver, esophagus, and right lung. Solanas then turned the gun on a companion of Warhol, Mario Amaya, injuring his thigh. Warhol survived his injuries, but he never fully recovered. Earlier, Solanas had given a script to Warhol, in hopes that he would make a film out of it. Warhol never did. Apparently, she had visited the Factory earlier in the day to ask that they give the script back to her. It had, however, been lost. She later explained that she had attacked Warhol because, "he had too much control over her life." The story of Valerie Solanas was made into the 1996 film ''I Shot Andy Warhol'', starring Lili Taylor and directed by Mary Harron.
In the hospital, his doctors had already declared him deceased, after which he was resuscitated. Warhol later joked that he was now invulnerable, since he had gone through death and came out alive. The shooting and Warhol's "death" received wide media coverage.
One of Warhol's associates, Paul Morrissey, later satirized the event in his movie "Women In Revolt", calling a group similar to Solanas' S.C.U.M. ('''Society for Cutting Up Men'''), ''P.I.G.'' ('''Politically Involved Girls''').
In 1990 Lou Reed recorded the album ''Songs for Drella'' (one of Warhol's nicknames was Drella, a combination of Dracula and Cinderella) with fellow Velvet Underground alumnus John Cale.
Warhol had adopted Reed's band the Velvet Underground as one of his projects in the 1960s, "producing" their first album The Velvet Underground and Nico as well as providing the album art, widely regarded as some of the greatest album art of all time. The album itself is also regarded as one of the greatest (and most influential) albums in rock history. After the band became successful Warhol and band leader Reed started to disagree more and more about the direction the band should take, and the contact between them faded. On the album, Reed apologizes and comes to terms with his part in their conflict.
Death
Warhol died in New York City following routine gallbladder surgery at the age of 58. Warhol was afraid of hospitals and doctors, so he had delayed having his recurring gall bladder problems checked.
He is interred at St. John the Baptist Catholic Cemetery in Bethel Park, south of Pittsburgh. Fellow artist Yoko Ono was among the speakers at his funeral.
Andy Warhol had so many posessions it took Sotheby's 9 days to auction his estate after his death for a total gross amount of over 20,000,000 (USD).
Work
Paintings
When he decided to pursue a career as an artist, Warhol had already established a reputation as a commercial illustrator. In school he had made paintings, but his work afterwards had mainly consisted of "blotted ink" illustrations for warehouses and magazines. He felt that he was not being taken seriously as an illustrator, and wanted to become a "real" artist.
When he started painting, he looked to find a niche for himself. At that time Pop Art as it was later to be called was already experimented with by several artists turning away from abstract expressionism, and Warhol turned to this new way of making art, where popular subjects could be part of the artist's vocabulary. His early paintings show images taken from cartoons and advertisements, in a hand painted style, with paint drips. He added these drips to give his paintings a "serious" feel, to emulate a bit of the style of the abstract expressionists, that were en vogue at the time, in other words to be taken seriously or to sell his paintings, which may have had the same meaning to Warhol.
To Warhol, part of defining a niche was defining his subject matter. Cartoons were already being "done" by Roy Liechtenstein, typography by Jasper Johns, et cetera Warhol wanted a distinguishing subject. His friends suggested that he should paint the things he loved the most. In his signature way of taking things literally, for his first major exhibition he painted his famous cans of Campbell's Soup, that he had for lunch most of his life. Warhol loved money, so he later painted money. He loved celebrities, so he painted them as well.
From these beginnings he developed his later style and themes. Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the hand made from the artistic process. Warhol went from painting to silk screening, his later drawings were traced from slide projections. In other words, Warhol went from being a painter to being a designer of paintings. At the height of his fame as a painter, Warhol had several assistants who produced his silk screen multiples, in different versions and variations after his directions.
It has been suggested by many that Warhol would just take images of things that were hip in his time and cover them in "Warhol gravy", but for Warhol there was always a personal relation between him and his subjects. For instance the Campbell's Soup did not (only) function as an illustration of commercial industry and advertisement, it was an intrinsical part of Warhol's life and memories. As a child his mother had given him this soup when he was sick, and Warhol loved it very much as a grown up. For him (and many other Americans) the soup represented a feeling of being "home".
Another criterion that is important in the way Warhol chose his subjects is that the subjects should also represent a more philosophical notion, should have a metaphorical quality. When Warhol paints money, he paints it because he wants to own it canvases filled with money. Partly, his work was meant to provide him with this money (and success and fame and maybe even love). At the same time these paintings speak of art as a commercial commodity: the paintings of dollar bills represent monetary value as well, as investments. In this way, instead of merely depicting dollar bills, these paintings touch on notions like (artistic) value, or may be perceived as a comment on art practice.
Similarly, when Warhol paints photographs of disasters in bright colors ("Red Car Crash", "Purple Jumping Man", "Orange Disaster") they point at the horror of the event in the picture, and its media value, but also at the way in which these images are trivialized by the media. By turning these "random" clippings into paintings, Warhol turns them into monuments for personal tragedies. As such they represent a personal experience as well as a social comment as well as an illustration of a time when the media grew to be more and more important.
On a personal level a lot of Warhol's work is motivational in nature, and speaks of notions like democracy, being able to change things, optimistic materialism, being heard. But Warhol wasn't naively optimistic about these things, his work also deals with loss, death, loneliness and the such.
Warhol knew how to juggle many levels of meaning and interpretation, and to combine these in seemingly simple, sometimes even dumb looking works of art. In general his work has a very high "Duh!" level.
Although a bit of a generalization, it may be accurate to say that Warhol depicted highly his very personal approach to subjects that everyone knows, in a way that these subjects become symbolic.
Warhol's work became more and more conceptual and more reflective of art itself. His series of Do It Yourself Paintings and Rorschach blots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be. His Cow Wallpaper (literally wallpaper with a cow motif) and his Oxidation Paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that show oxidated urine stains) are also noteworthy in this context. Warhol later did a series of his old works in negative, as a comment on his own position as an artist.
In the beginning of his career Warhol worked on a growing oeuvre of American forms and values, newspaper clippings, disasters, money, commercial products, Coca Cola bottles, postal stamps, movie stars, criminals, shoes, clothes, etc. defining a position, researching and making statements. As recognition and the value of his work grew, he went back to his roots as a commercial illustrator, and starts to take commissions, most noticeably for portraits. These are sometimes viewed as Warhol's sell out (the revolutionary painter that became a jester), but it can also be argued that his self supporting way of working fit his world views. At any rate, his body of portraits that include many celebrities, athletes, movie stars, politicians, dictators, royalty, his mother, transvestites have became a document of an era. Having the money or the relations to be portrayed by Warhol meant that you might be able to enter into immortality. Warhol's commercial effort also include advertisements for Chanel, Apple and more.
There are three more periods that are noteworthy in Warhol's oeuvre as a painter.
His self portraits, of which he made many, with his silver wig, painted over with camouflage print may represent Warhol studying his own identity. Warhol has spoken about himself and was spoken about as being empty, hollow, a reflection or a mirror. The second series is his paintings of shadows. These may represent Warhol's study of the abstract. Again there is a relation with Warhol personally, as he has also depicted himself as "The Shadow," the character from the radio show. Thirdly, Warhol produced many "portfolios," series of small paintings meant for commercial sale. These series would be grouped around a theme for instance, "famous Jews", "cars", or "animals".
At one point Warhol publicly declared that he had stopped being a painter, and that he would only make films from then on but at the end of his life, Warhol took up painting again. His last paintings and drawings are of da Vinci's ''Last Supper'', which he was working on when he died.
Films
Warhol worked across a wide range of mediums painting, photography, drawing, and sculpture. He was also a highly prolific filmmaker. Between 1963 and 1968, he made more than sixty films. One of his most famous films, ''Sleep'' (1963), shows a man (John Giorno, who had a relationship with Warhol) sleeping for eight hours. In the 35 minute film ''Blow Job'' (1963), he shows the face of David Pelman receiving fellatio. Another, ''Empire'' (1964), consists of eight hours of footage of the Empire State Building in New York City at dusk. Warhol's 1965 film ''''Vinyl'''' is an adaptation of Anthony Burgess' popular dystopian novel ''A Clockwork Orange''. Others record improvised encounters between Factory regulars such as Brigid Berlin, Viva, Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling, Holly Woodlawn, Ondine, Nico, and Jackie Curtis. Legendary underground artist Jack Smith appears in the film ''Camp''.
His most popular and critically successful film was ''Chelsea Girls'' (1966). The film was highly innovative in that it consisted of two 16 mm films being projected simultaneously, with two different stories being shown in tandem. From the projection booth, the sound would be raised for one film to elucidate that "story" while it was lowered for the other. Then it would be the other film's turn to bask in the glory of sound. The multiplication of images evoked Warhol's seminal silk screen works of the early 1960s. The film's influence could be felt as late as 2000 in Mike Figgis' ''Timecode''.
Other important films include ''My Hustler'', ''Midnight Cowboy'', and ''Lonesome Cowboys'' (1968), a raunchy pseudo western. ''Blue Movie'', a film in which Warhol superstar Viva makes love and fools around in bed with a man for 33 minutes of the film's playing time, was Warhol's last film as director. The film was at the time scandalous for its frank approach to a sexual encounter. For many years Viva refused to allow it to be screened. It was publicly screened in New York in 2005 for the first time in over thirty years.
After his June 3, 1968 shooting, a reclusive Warhol relinquished his personal involvement in filmmaking. His acolyte and assistant director, Paul Morrissey, took over the film making chores for the Factory collective, steering Warhol branded cinema towards more mainstream, narrative based, B movie exploitation fare with ''Flesh'', ''Trash'', and ''Heat''. All of these films, including the later ''Andy Warhol's Dracula'' and ''Andy Warhol's Frankenstein'', were far more mainstream than anything Warhol as a director had attempted. These latter "Warhol" films, all of which frankly were made to make money, starred Joe Dallesandro, who was more of a Morrissey star than a true Warhol superstar.
In order to facilitate the success of these Warhol branded, Morrissey directed movies in the marketplace, all of Warhol's earlier avant garde films were removed from distribution and exhibition by 1972.
The first volume of a catalogue raison for the Factory film archive is to be published in the spring of 2006.
As an actor, Warhol appeared as a bartender in The Cars' music video for their single "Hello Again", and Curiosity Killed The Cat's video for their "Misfit" single (both videos, and others, were produced by Warhol's video production company). He also appeared in an episode of The Love Boat.
Warhol's character has also been represented in several motion pictures. He has been portrayed by Crispin Glover, David Bowie, and Jared Harris, in ''The Doors'', ''Basquiat'', and ''I Shot Andy Warhol,'' respectively.
Filmography
! These have been reorganised chronologically from oldest to most recent
''Blow Job'' (1963)
''Eat'' (1963)
''Haircut'' (1963)
''Kiss'' (1963)
''Naomi's Birthday Party'' (1963)
''Sleep'' (1963)
''13 Most Beautiful Women'' (1964)
''Batman Dracula'' (1964)
''Clockwork'' (1964)
''Couch'' (1964)
''Drunk'' (1964)
''Empire'' (1964)
''The End of Dawn'' (1964)
''Lips'' (1964)
''Mario Banana I'' (1964)
''Mario Banana II'' (1964)
''Messy Lives'' (1964)
''Naomi and Rufus Kiss'' (1964)
''Tarzan and Jane Regained... Sort of'' (1964)
''The Thirteen Most Beautiful Boys'' (1964)
''Beauty 2'' (1965)
''Bitch'' (1965)
''Camp'' (1965)
''Harlot'' (1965)
''Horse'' (1965)
''Kitchen'' (1965)
''The Life of Juanita Castro'' (1965)
''My Hustler'' (1965)
''Poor Little Rich Girl'' (1965)
''Restaurant'' (1965)
''Space'' (1965)
''Taylor Mead's Ass'' (1965)
''''Vinyl'''' (1965)
''Screen Test'' (1965)
''Screen Test 2'' (1965)
''Ari and Mario'' (1966)
''Hedy'' (1966)
''Kiss the Boot'' (1966)
''Milk'' (1966)
''Salvador Dal '' (1966)
''Shower'' (1966)
''Sunset'' (1966)
''Superboy'' (1966)
''The Closet'' (1966)
''Chelsea Girls'' (1966)
''The Beard'' (1966)
''More Milk, Yvette'' (1966)
''Outer and Inner Space'' (1966)
''The Velvet Underground and Nico'' (1966)
''The Andy Warhol Story'' (1967)
''Tiger Morse'' (1967)
'' '' (1967)
''The Imitation of Christ'' (1967)
''The Nude Restaurant'' (1967)
''Bike Boy'' (1967)
''I, a Man'' (1967)
''San Diego Surf'' (1968)
''The Loves of Ondine'' (1968)
''Blue Movie'' (1969)
''Lonesome Cowboys'' (1969)
''L'Amour'' (1972)
Books and Print
Warhol "wrote" several books.
''A, a novel'' (1968, ISBN 0 8021 3553 6) is a literal transcription containing spelling errors and phonetically written background noise and mumbling of audio recordings of Ondine and several of Andy Warhol's friends hanging out at the Factory, talking, going out.
''The Philosophy of Andy Warhol from A to B and back again'' (1975, ISBN 0 15 671720 4) according to Pat Hackett's introduction to ''The Andy Warhol Diaries'', Pat Hackett did the transcriptions and text for the book based on daily phone conversations, sometimes (when Warhol was traveling) using audio cassettes that Andy Warhol gave her. Said cassettes contained conversations with Brigid Berlin (aka Brigid Polk) and former ''Interview'' magazine editor Bob Colacello.
''Popism: The Warhol Sixties'' (1980, ISBN 0 15 672960 1), authored by Warhol and Pat Hackett is a retrospective view of the sixties and the role of Pop Art.
''The Andy Warhol Diaries'' (1989, ISBN 0 446 39138 7, edited by Pat Hackett) is an edited diary that was dictated by Warhol to Hackett in daily phone conversations. Warhol started keeping a diary to keep track of his expenses after being audited.
Warhol created the fashion magazine ''Interview'' that is still published today. The loopy title script on the cover is thought to be either his own handwriting or that of his mother, Julia Warhola, who would often do text work for his early commercial pieces.
Other Media
As stated, although Andy Warhol is most known for his paintings and films, he has authored works in many different media.
Drawing: Warhol started his carreer drawing commercial illustrations in "blotted ink" style for warehouses and magazines. Most well known are his pictures of shoes. Some of his drawings were published in little booklets, like "Yum, Yum, Yum" (about food), "Ho, Ho, Ho" (about Christmas) and (of course) "Shoes, Shoes, Shoes". His most artistically acclaimed book of drawings is probably "The Gold Book", compiled of sensitive, personal drawings of young men. "The Gold Book" is thus dubbed because of the leaf gold that decorates the pages.
Sculpture: Warhol's most famous sculpture is probably his "Brillo Boxes" silkscreened wooden replicas of Brillo soap boxes. Other famous works include the "Silver Floating Pillows" gas filled, silver, pillow shaped balloons that were floated out of the window during the presentation.
Audio: At one point Warhol carried a portable recorder with him wherever he went, taping everything everybody said and did. He referred to this device as his "wife". Some of these tapes were the basis for his literary work. Another audio work of Warhol's was his "Invisible Sculpture," a presentation in which burglar alarms would go off when entering the room. Warhol's cooperation with the musicians of The Velvet Underground was driven by an expressed desire to become a music producer.
Television: Andy Warhol dreamed of a television show that he wanted to call "The Nothing Special", a Special about his favorite subject: Nothing. Later in his career he did create two cable television shows, "Andy Warhol's TV" in 1982 and "Andy Warhol's Fifteen Minutes" for MTV in 1986. Besides his own shows he regularly made guest appearances in shows like "Love Boat".
Fashion: Warhol is quoted for having said: "I'd rather buy a dress and put it up on the wall, than put a painting, wouldn't you?" One of his most well known Superstars, Edie Sedgwick, aspired to be a fashion designer, and his good friend Halston was a famous one. Warhol's work in fashion includes silkscreened dresses, a short sub career as a catwalk model and books on fashion as well as paintings with fashion (shoes) as a subject.
Performance Art: Warhol and his friends staged happenings theatrical multimedia presentations during parties, containing music, film, slide projections and Gerard Malanga in an S M outfit cracking a whip. The Exploding Plastic Inevitable is the culmination of this area of his work.
Photography: To produce his silkscreens, Warhol made photographs or had them made by his friends and assistants. These pictures were mostly taken with a specific model of Polaroid camera that Polaroid kept in production especially for Warhol. This photographic approach to painting and his snapshot method of taking pictures has had a great effect on artistic photography. His late oeuvre contains black and white photos sewn together.
Product
In many of his efforts Warhol has taken the position of a producer or director, rather than a creator. From an artist he gradually became the person that determined the direction and was the public face of a company, having a staff of sorts to do the actual labor involved in his products. He would coin an idea and oversee its execution, his Factory evolved from an atelier into an office.
As this position proved to work out, he found himself able to expand his activities into other fields. He founded the gossip magazine Interview, creating a stage for celebrities he "endorsed" and creating jobs for his friends. He adopted the young painter Jean Michel Basquiat, and the band The Velvet Underground and presented them to the public as his latest interest, cooperating with them, shaping their public personas. He would produce things and people, and they were part of his artistic product. He endorsed products, appeared in commercials, made business deals and even "sold" the film making branch of his company when he decided to spend less time filming himself.
In this respect Warhol talked about "Art Business" and "Business Art", and how he thought business was the best type of art. This was a radical new stance, as artists had always presented themselves as flamboyant, individual, visionairy outsiders commenting on the normal part of society, but never really being a part of it. And receiving appreciation for that position on basis of their idealism, rare talents and personalities. Warhol and other pop artists helped redefine the artist's position as professional, commercial, popular a logical and valuable part of society. He did this using methods, imagery and talents that were (or at least seemed to be) available to everyone. Perhaps that has been the most meaningful result of (his) Pop Art: a philosophical and practical incorporation of art into society, art as a product of society.
Museums
The Andy Warhol Museum is located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. It is the largest American art museum dedicated to a single artist, holding more than 4,000 works by the artist himself.
Among others, Andy's brother, John Warhola, and the Warhol Foundation in New York, established in 1991 the Warhol Family Museum of Modern Art in the remote town of Medzilaborce, Slovakia. Andy's mother, Julia Warhola, was born 15 kilometers away in the village of Mikova. The museum houses several originals donated mainly by the Andy Warhol Foundation in New York and also personal items donated by Warhol's relatives
Further Reading on Warhol
Jennifer Doyle, Jonathan Flatley, and Jos Esteban Mu oz, uPop Out: Queer Warhol u (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996).
Fred Lawrence Guiles, uLover at the Ball: The Life of Andy Warhol u (New York: Bantam, 1989).
Wayne Koestenbaum, uAndy Warhol u (New York: Penguin, 2003).
Richard Meyer, uOutlaw Representation u (New York: Beacon, 2003).
Steven Watson, uFactory Made: Warhol and the Sixties u (New York: Pantheon, 2003).
See also
Electric Circus (nightclub) Warhol had a section called "La Dom" on a lower floor
External links
in Mus e d'Art Contemporain de Lyon.
in New York, New York.
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Includes a biography, selection of images, famous quotes, and links to the artist.
''Andy Warhol's works are still widely at present in various shows and permanent collections in museums or galleries throughout the world.''
A warholesque biography of Andy Warhol.
Online Catalog of Limited Editions
at Gagosian Gallery
Listening
(''Studio 360'' radio program, December 10, 2005)
! interwiki
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
Warhol, Andy
bg:
ca:Andy Warhol
cs:Andy Warhol
cy:Andy Warhol
da:Andy Warhol
de:Andy Warhol
es:Andy Warhol
eo:Andy WARHOL
fr:Andy Warhol
gl:Andy Warhol
ko:
hr:Andy Warhol
it:Andy Warhol
he:
jv:Andy Warhol
lt:Andy Warhol
li:Andy Warhol
lmo:Andy Warhol
hu:Andy Warhol
mk:
nl:Andy Warhol
ja:
no:Andy Warhol
pl:Andy Warhol
pt:Andy Warhol
ro:Andy Warhol
ru: ,
sh:Andy Warhol
simple:Andy Warhol
sk:Andy Warhol
sr:
fi:Andy Warhol
sv:Andy Warhol
zh:
Album infobox
Name AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted
Type Album
Artist Ice Cube
Cover AmeriKKKa.jpg
Background Orange
Released May 16, 1990
Recorded 1989
Genre Gangsta rap
Length 49:36
Label Priority
Producer Ice Cube, Hank Shocklee, Chuck D, Sir Jinx, Yo Yo
Reviews nowiki nowiki
''All Music Guide''
Last album
This album '''''AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted'''''br (1990)
Next album ''Kill At Will''br (1990)
'''''AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted''''' was Ice Cube's debut solo album after his acrimonious split from N.W.A.. It was originally released May 16, 1990 (see 1990 in music).
The title of the album is controversial. It is a spoof of a television show called "America's Most Wanted", wherein real life crimes are reenacted and viewers are asked to call in if they have seen the alleged perpetrators. The show has taken some criticism for the reenactments, which critics claim perpetuate beliefs in the criminality of African American men and other minorities. The political spelling of "America" with "KKK" equates both the show and the status quo of society in the United States with the Ku Klux Klan, a white supremacist organization.
''AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted'' is a gangsta rap album, and the songs are tales of a young black man living in the ghetto and dealing with such issues as drug addiction, racism and poverty. To understand the album's statement, it is important to note the environment of Los Angeles in the early 1990s. Riots would rack the city following the Rodney King verdict, seen by many (including Ice Cube) as an example of the racism inherent in the judicial and law enforcement systems. Also, the O. J. Simpson trial would provoke further racial tension in the country, especially Los Angeles. Unlike many other albums from the same period, Cube did not allow the subject matter to infuse the album with inherent negativity. He attacks perceived racist social structures, far more than many gangsta rappers were doing at the time and since. Though he describes with detail the conditions of the ghetto, he does so in order to condemn those that allow ghetto despair to occur, instead of glorifying it.
Cube takes some controversial stands, referring to certain types of African Americans as "Oreo cookies", implying that they appear to be black but are actually willing participants in the racial hierarchy that keeps the majority of African Americans living in poverty stricken and drug riddled ghettos specifically, this is aimed at soft pop R B radio stations broadcasting a watered down sound. Arsenio Hall is specifically mentioned as being such a "sell out". The titular song on the album directly parodies the television show, "America's Most Wanted", exposing the perceived racism inherent in watching largely African American men being arrested for entertainment.
:"I think back to when I was robbin' my own kind,
:the police didn't pay it no mind.
:But when I start robbin the white folks?
:Now I'm in the pen with the soap on a rope"
A later song ("Get Off My Dick Nigga, and Tell Yo Bitch to Come Here") returns to the same theme at the end, with newscaster Peter Jennings reporting on rioting: "Outside the south central area, few cared about the violence because it didn't affect them." Also of interest is "It's a Man's World", a rap conversation with Yo Yo the two verbally spar and trade sexist barbs back and forth outside of this song, the album received criticism for alleged sexism, as in "You Can't Fade Me", a humorous track where Cube fantasizes about kicking a former one night stand in the stomach because she is pregnant with his baby. "Nigga You Love To Hate" is also notable for a chorus chanting "Fuck you, Ice Cube", setting the tone for the album and introducing a pattern of obscenity and profanity.
Produced by the Bomb Squad (Public Enemy) and Da Lench Mob, ''AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted'' received accolades for innovation in production upon release. However, many critics do not feel that the beats in the album have aged very well. Since this time, West Coast rap has largely taken a different direction from Ice Cube's style, heading more towards the smooth drawl of Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg this album sounds dated as a result.
Before striking out on his own, Ice Cube was a member of the legendary West Coast rap group N.W.A. (''Straight Outta Compton'' 1989). Thus, Ice Cube's lyrical style is descended from West Coast rappers like Ice T (''Iceberg Freedom of Speech...Just Watch What You Say'' 1989) and Too hort (''Life Is...Too hort''). Musically, Public Enemy (''Yo! Bum Rush the Show'' 1987)'s spare, hollow beats, old school rappers like Eric B. Gap Band ''The Gap Band II'') and soul (Sly Curtis Mayfield ''Let's Do It Again'' 1975) influenced Ice Cube's sound, partially through his producers, the Bomb Squad.
Ice Cube influenced later West Coast rappers, including the stoned drawl of Cypress Hill (''Cypress Hill'' 1991) and The Pharcyde (''Bizarre Ride II to the Pharcyde'' 1992), as well as later G Funk rappers like Dr. Dre (''The Chronic'' 1992) and Snoop Doggy Dogg (''Doggystyle'' 1993). Though Ice Cube's popularity among mainstream listeners has not continued into the late 1990s, and his sound is distinctively old school to modern ears, many rappers themselves have been influenced by his innovative lyrical techniques. Rappers like Eminem (''The Slim Shady LP'' 1999), Nas (''Illmatic'' 1994) and Tupac Shakur (''2Pacalypse Now'' 1992) similarly use cartoonish and unrealistic images of thug violence to protest the conditions of the poor and working class. While Ice Cube most often described true circumstances in outlandish fashion, such as a fairy tale in "A Gangsta's Fairytale", later rappers took this to the extreme of describing physically impossible acts of violence in an outrageously exaggerated manner.
The album spawned the hit single soulful and depressing ''Dead Homiez'' on the charts.
Track listing
"Better off Dead" (Brian Holt Ice Cube)
"The Nigga Ya Love to Hate" (Ice Cube E. Sadler)
"Amerikkka's Most Wanted" (Ice Cube Sadler Keith Shocklee)
"What They Hittin' Foe" (Average White Band Ice Cube)
"You Can't Fade Me JD's Gaffilin'" (Ice Cube Sadler)
"Once upon a Time in the Projects" (Ice Cube Sir Jinx)
"Turn off the Radio" (D. Ice Cube Sadler Betty Shabazz)
"Endangered Species (Tales from the Darkside)" (Chuck D Ice Cube Sadler Sir Jinx)
"A Gangsta's Fairytale" (Ice Cube Sadler)
"I'm Only Out for One Thang" (Flavor Flav Ice Cube Sir Jinx Stevie Wonder)
"Get off My Dick and Tell Yo Bitch to Come Here" (Ice Cube Sadler)
"The Drive By" (Shocklee Sir Jinx)
"Rollin' Wit the Lench Mob" (Ice Cube Sadler)
"Who's the Mack?" (Ice Cube JBs)
"It's a Man's World" (Ice Cube Sir Jinx Yo Yo)
"The Bomb" (Ice Cube Sir Jinx)
"Endangered Species (Tales From the Darkside)(Remix)"
"Jackin For Beats"
"Get Off My Dick and Tell Yo Bitch To Come Here(Remix)"
"The Product"
"Dead Homiez"
"JD s Gaffilin (Part 2)"
"I Gotta Say What Up!!!"
Tracks 17 23 are on the 2003 re release, originally on the out of print 1990 EP ''Kill At Will''.
Personnel
The Bomb Squad Record Producer
Mario Castellanos Photography
Chris Champion Assistant Engineer
Chuck D. Performer
Da Lench Mob Vocals (bckgr), Producer
(Ex) Cat Heads Vocals (bckgr)
Flavor Flav Vocals, Performer
Ricky Harris Vocals (bckgr)
Al Hayes Bass Guitar, Guitar
Vincent Henry Flute, Saxophone
Brian Holt Vocals
Kevin Hosmann Art Direction
Ice Cube Vocals, Producer
J. Dee Vocals (bckgr)
Tim Rollins Piano
E. Sadler Producer
Nick Sansano Engineer
Shannon Vocals (bckgr)
Christopher Shaw Engineer
Keith Shocklee Scratching
Sir Jinx Vocals (bckgr), Producer
Howie Weinberg Mastering
Dan Wood Vocals (bckgr), Engineer
Yo Yo Vocals, Performer
Chart positions
Billboard Music Charts (North America) album
1990 The Billboard 200 No. 19
1990 Top R B Hip Hop Albums No. 6
Billboard (North America) singles
1990 Amerikkka's Most Wanted Hot Rap Singles No. 1
External links
Category:Ice Cube albums
Category:1990 albums
'''Afrika Bambaataa''' (born April 10 or October 4, 1957 or 1960, though his birthdate is hotly debated he himself refuses to comment on his age) is a DJ and community leader from the South Bronx, who was instrumental in the early development of hip hop throughout the 1970s.
Afrika Bambaataa's birthname has been mistakenly listed as Kevin Donovan however, Kevin Donovan was actually another man and leader of the Harlem Underground Band.
During Bambaataa's early years, he was a founding member of the Bronxdale Projects area street gang, The Savage Seven. Due to the explosive growth of the gang, it later became known as the Black Spades, and Bambaataa rose to the position of Division Leader. After a life changing visit to Africa, he changed his name to '''Afrika Bambaataa Aasim'''. Bambaataa was influenced by the depiction of the Zulu warriors attacking British troops at Rorke's Drift in the Michael Caine film ''Zulu''. He took his name, which roughly translated to "affectionate leader", from the film.
After the visit, Bambaataa decided to use his leadership to turn those involved in the gang life into something more positive to the community. This began the development of The Organization, which soon later became known as the Zulu Nation, a group of racially and politically aware rappers, B boys, graffiti artists and other people involved in hip hop culture that gained fame in the early eighties to mid nineties. By 1977, inspired by DJ Kool Herc, Bambaataa had begun organizing block parties all around the South Bronx, and he was soon renowned as one of the best DJs in the business. In 1980, he produced Soul Sonic Force's landmark single, "Zulu Nation Throwdown". In 2000 Rage Against The Machine covered Afrika's song Renegades of Funk for their album "Renegades".
In 1982, Bambaataa organised the very first European hip hop tour. Along with himself were rapper and graffiti artist Rammellzee, Zulu Nation DJ Grand Mixer DXT (formerly Grand Mixer D.St), B boy and B girl crews the Rock Steady Crew, and the Double Dutch Girls, as well as legendary graffiti artists Fab 5 Freddy, Phase 2, Futura 2000, and Dondi.
Also in 1982, Bambaataa became a solo artist (having produced several other singles) and released "Jazzy Sensation" on Tommy Boy Records in that year. "Planet Rock", a popular single, came out that June under the name Afrika Bambaataa and the Soul Sonic Force. The song melded electronic hip hop beats with the main melody from Kraftwerk's Trans Europe Express, as well as portions from records by Ennio Morricone and Captain Sky thus creating a new style of music altogether, electro funk. It influenced many styles of electronic and dance music, e.g. house music and techno music. In 1984, Bambaataa recorded "Unity" with James Brown and released "World Destruction" under the name Time Zone (with John Lydon). Shango Funk Theology, a full length album, came out under the name Shango. This was followed by "Funk You" in 1985 and then his formal full album debut, Beware (The Funk Is Everywhere).
Bambaataa then left Tommy Boy and signed with Capitol Records, released The Light (as Afrika Bambaataa the Family), which included aid from George Clinton, Bootsy Collins, Boy George and UB40. 1990 2000: Decade of Darkness was released in 1991. It included both hip house tracks that were produced by the Italian team De Point (most of those have been collected on ZYX record's "The 12" Mixes" Compilation) as well as hip hop and electro funk tracks. On "Warlocks and Witches", Bam (as his name is often abbreviated) focused on hip hop. From the mid 1990s, Bam returned to his electro roots, collaborating with Westbam (who was named after him) and culminating in 2004's excellent album "Dark Matter Moving at the Speed of Light" which featured Gary Numan and many others.
Discography
cellpadding "5" cellspacing "0" border "0" style "border:3px solid grey "
! '''Year''' '''Title''' '''Label'''
1982 ''Planet Rock (with Soul Sonic Force)'' Tommy Boy Records (12")
1982 ''Looking For The Perfect Beat (with Soul Sonic Force)'' Tommy Boy Records (12")
1983 ''Renegades Of Funk'' Tommy Boy Records (12")
1983 ''Wildstyle'' Celluloid Records (12")
1984 ''Frantic Situation (with Shango from the motion picture soundtrack "Beat Street")'' Tommy Boy Records
1985 ''Sun City (Artists United Against Apartheid)'' EMI
1986 ''Planet Rock The Album'' Tommy Boy Records (12")
1986 ''Beware (The Funk Is Everywhere)''
Tommy Boy Records
1987 ''Death Mix Throwdown'' Blatant
1988 ''The Light'' EMI America
1991 ''The Decade of Darkness 1990 2000'' EMI Records USA
1992 ''Don't Stop... Planet Rock (The Remix EP)'' Tommy Boy (EP)
1993 "Zulu War Chant" Profile (12")
1993 "What's the Name of this Nation?... Zulu" Profile (12")
1994 "Feel the Vibe" DFC (12") (with Khayan)
1996 "Jazzin'" by Khayan ZYX
1996 ''Lost Generation'' Hot
1996 ''Warlocks and Witches, Computer Chips, Microchips and You'' Profile
1997 ''Zulu Groove'' Hudson Vandam (Compilation)
1998 "Agharta The City of Shamballa" Low Spirit (12") (with Westbam)
1999 ''Electro Funk Breakdown'' DMC
1999 ''Return to Planet Rock'' Berger Music
2000 ''Hydraulic Funk'' Strictly Hype
2001 ''Electro Funk Breakdown'' DMX (Compilation)
2001 ''Looking for the Perfect Beat: 1980 1985'' Tommy Boy Records (Compilation)
2004 ''Dark Matter Moving at the Speed of Light'' Tommy Boy Records
2005 ''Metal'' Tommy Boy Records
2005 ''Metal Remixes'' Tommy Boy Records
See also
Nuwaubianism
External links
Bambaataa, Afrika
Bambaataa, Afrika
Bambaataa, Afrika
Bambaataa, Afrika
Bambaata, Afrika
Bambaata, Afrika
als:Afrika Bambaata
de:Afrika Bambaataa
fr:Afrika Bambaataa
nl:Afrika Bambaataa
pl:Kevin Donovan
pt:Afrika Bambaataa
sv:Afrika Bambaataa
! Unsourced image removed:
'''Muhammed ben Da'ud''' (1029 December 15, 1072) was the second sultan of the dynasty of Seljuk Turks, in Persia, and great grandson of Seljuk, the founder of the dynasty. He assumed the name of Muhammed when he embraced Islam, and on account of his military prowess and personal valor and fighting skills he obtained the surname '''Alp Arslan''', which signifies "a valiant lion."
He succeeded his father Da'ud as ruler of Khorasan in 1059, and his uncle To r l as sultan of Iran and Baghdad in 1063, and thus became sole monarch of Persia from the river Oxus to the Tigris. In consolidating his empire and subduing contending factions he was ably assisted by Nizam ul Mulk, his Persian vizier, and one of the most eminent statesmen in early Muslim history. With Peace and security established in his dominions, he convoked an assembly of the states and declared his son Malik Shah I his heir and successor. With the hope of acquiring immense booty in the rich church of St. Basil in Caesarea Mazaca, the capital of Cappadocia, he placed himself at the head of the Turkish cavalry, crossed the Euphrates and entered and plundered that city. He then marched into Armenia and Georgia, which he conquered in 1064.
Byzantine struggle
In 1068 Alp Arslan invaded the Byzantine Empire. The emperor Romanus IV Diogenes, assuming the command in person, met the invaders in Cilicia. In three arduous campaigns, the first two of which were conducted by the emperor himself while the third was directed by Manuel Comnenus (great uncle of Emperor Manuel Comnenus), the Turks were defeated in detail in 1070 driven across the Euphrates. In 1071 Romanus again took the field and advanced with 100,000 men, including a contingent of the Turkish tribe of the Uzes as well as contingents of French and Normans, under Ursel of Bahol, into Armenia.
At Manzikert, on the Murad Tchai, north of Lake Van, he was met by Alp Arslan. The sultan proposed terms of peace, which were rejected by the emperor, and the two forces met in the Battle of Manzikert, in which the Byzantines, after a terrible slaughter, were totally routed a result due mainly to the betrayal of Romanus by his political enemies during the battle and the rapid tactics of the Turkish cavalry.
Emperor Romanus IV was himself taken prisoner and conducted into the presence of Alp Arslan, who treated him with generosity, and terms of peace having been agreed to, dismissed him, loaded with presents and respectfully attended by a military guard. This famous conversation is recorded to have taken place after Romanus IV was brought as a prisoner before the Sultan:
:''Alp Arslan'': "What would you do if I was brought before you as a prisoner?"
:''Romanus'': "Perhaps I'd kill you, or exhibit you in the streets of Constantinople."
:''Alp Arslan'': "My punishment is far heavier. I forgive you, and set you free."
Unfortunately for Romanus, the Emperor's subjects were far less kind than his enemy, making the mercy of Alp Arlsan a curse: Romanus was blinded and finally killed after great torment.
After Alp Arslan's victories the balance in the near Asia changed completely in favour of Seljuk Turks and Sunni Muslims. While the Byzantine Empire was to continue for nearly another four centuries, and the Crusades would contest the issue for some time, their victory at Manzikert signalled the beginning of Turkish ascendancy in the Middle East. Most historians, including Edward Gibbons, date the defeat at Manzikert as the beginning of the end of the Eastern Roman Empire. Certainly the entry of Turkic farmers following their horsemen ended the themes in Anatolia which had furnished the Empire with men and treasure. The importance of this battle, and the skill of Alp Arslan in fighting it, cannot be overstated.
State organization
Alp Arslan's strength lay in the military realm, domestic affairs being handled by his Persian vizier, Nizam al Mulk founder of the administrative organization which characterized and strengthened the sultanate during the reigns of Alp Arslan and his son, Malik Shah. Military fiefs, governed by Seljuk princes, were established to provide support for the soldiery and to accommodate the nomadic Turks to the established Persian agricultural scene. This type of military fiefdom enabled the nomadic Turks to draw on the resources of the sedantary Persians, and other established cultures within the Seljuk realm, and allowed Alp Arslan to field a huge standing army, without depending on tribute from conquest to pay his soldiery. He not only had enough food from his subjects to maintain his military, but the taxes collected from traders and merchants added to his coffers sufficiently to fund his continuous wars.
Death
The dominion of Alp Arslan after Manzikert extended over much of western Asia. He soon prepared to march to the conquest of Turkestan, the original seat of his ancestors. With a powerful army he advanced to the banks of the Oxus. Before he could pass the river with safety, however, it was necessary to subdue certain fortresses, one of which was for several days vigorously defended by the governor, Yussuf el Harezmi, a Khwarezmian. He was, however, obliged to surrender and was carried a prisoner before the sultan, who condemned him to a cruel death. Yussuf, in desperation, drew his dagger and rushed upon the sultan. Alp Arslan motioned to his guards not to interfere and drew his bow, but his foot slipped, the arrow glanced aside and he received the assassin's dagger in his breast. Alp Arslan died four days later from this wound on November 25, 1072 in his 42nd year, and was taken to Merv to be buried next to his father a r Bey. Upon his tomb lies the following inscription:
: ''O those who saw the sky high grandeur of Alp Arslan, behold! He is under the black soil now''...
As he lay dying, Alp Arslan whispered to his son that his vanity had killed him. "Alas," he is recorded to have said, "surrounded by great warriors devoted to my cause, guarded night and day by them, I should have allowed them to do their job. I had been warned against trying to protect myself, and against letting my courage get in the way of my good sense. I forgot those warnings, and here I lay, dying in agony. Remember well the lessons learned, and do not allow your vanity to overreach your good sense..."
Reference
Category:1029 births
Category:1072 deaths
Category:Monarchs of Persia
Category:Seljuk Turks
bg:
de:Alp Arslan
fr:Alp Arslan
he:
nl:Alp Arslan
pl:Alp Arslan
fi:Alp Arslan
sv:Alp Arslan
tk:Alp Arslan
tr:Alp Arslan
The '''American Film Institute''' ('''AFI''') is an independent non profit organization created by the National Endowment for the Arts, which was established in 1967 when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act.
George Stevens, Jr., was the first CEO and Director. In 1980 Jean Picker Firstenberg became Director and CEO, a position she still holds.
The American Film Institute focuses on training through hands on experience with established figures in the AFI Conservatory, as well as on preserving old film, which is subject to degradation of its film stock. In spite of its name, AFI does not focus exclusively on film, but also on television and video.
In 1973, the AFI established a Life Achievement Award.
In 1998, the 100th anniversary of American film, AFI began its 100 Years Series, celebrating and promoting interest in film history.
They recently opened the AFI Silver theatre in Silver Spring, Maryland near Washington, D.C.
See also
AFI 100 Years series
AFI Awards 2005
AFI Awards 2004
AFI Awards 2003
AFI Awards 2002
AFI Awards 2001
External links
Category:Cinema of the United States
Category:Film schools
de:American Film Institute
fr:American Film Institute
it:American Film Institute
fi:American Film Institute
simple:American Film Institute
The '''auteur theory''' is the theory that a film (or a body of work) by a director (or, rarely, a producer) reflects the personal vision and preoccupations of that director, as if he or she were the work's primary "author" (auteur). The auteur theory has had a major impact on film criticism worldwide ever since it was first advocated by Fran ois Truffaut in 1954. "Auteurism" is the method of analyzing films based on this theory (or, alternately, the characteristics of a director's work that makes him an auteur). Both the Auteur Theory and the auteurism method of film analysis are frequently associated with the French New Wave and the film critics who wrote for the Cahiers du cin ma.
''For a list of directors who are considered '''auteurs''', go to the article Auteur''.
NOTOC
Truffaut's theory
In his 1954 essay ''Une certaine tendance du cin ma fran ais'' ("a certain tendency in the French cinema") Fran ois Truffaut coined the phrase "la politique des auteurs", and asserted that the worst of Jean Renoir's movies would always be more interesting than the best of Jean Delannoy's. "Politique" might very well be translated as "policy," "polemic" or "program" it involves a conscious decision to look at movies and to value them in a certain way. Truffaut provocatively said, "There are no good and bad movies, only good and bad directors."
Much of Truffaut's writing of this period (as too that of his colleagues at the film criticism magazine ''Cahiers du cin ma'') was designed to lambast post war French cinema, and especially the big production films of the ''cin ma de qualit '' ("quality films") that Truffaut's circle referred to with disdain as ''cin ma de papa'' (or "Dad's cinema"). Their sudden discovery of a host of great American movies which flooded France at the end of the war (the Nazi occupation had prevented the French from seeing such classics as The Maltese Falcon and Citizen Kane) incited Truffaut to take up arms against what he considered to be an old fashioned and sterile cinema. (One of the unfortunate ironies of the auteur theory is that, at the very moment Truffaut was writing, the Hollywood studio system of the 1950's had destroyed much of what he had appreciated.)
Truffaut's thinking was indebted to the work of Andr Bazin, co founder of the ''Cahiers du cin ma'' (where Truffaut worked), who promoted the idea that films should reflect a director's personal vision and who championed such filmmakers as Howard Hawks, Alfred Hitchcock and Jean Renoir. Although Bazin provided a forum for auteurism to flourish, he himself remained wary of its excesses.
Another key element of Truffaut's theory comes from Alexandre Astruc's notion of the ''cam ra stylo'' or "camera pen" and the idea that directors should wield their cameras like writers use their pens and that they need not be hindered by traditional storytelling.
Truffaut and the members of the ''Cahiers'' recognized that moviemaking was an industrial process. However, they proposed an ideal to strive for: the director should use the commercial apparatus the way a writer uses a pen and, through the mise en sc ne, imprint his or her vision on the work (conversely, the role of the screenwriter was minimized in their eyes). While recognizing that not all directors reached this ideal, they valued the work of those who neared it.
Truffaut's theory maintains that all good directors (and many bad ones) have such a distinctive style or consistent theme that their influence is unmistakable in the body of their work. Truffaut himself was appreciative of both directors with a marked visual style (such as Alfred Hitchcock), and those whose visual style was less pronounced but who had nevertheless a consistent theme throughout their movies (such as Jean Renoir's humanism).
Impact of the "auteur theory"
The ''auteur theory'' was used by the directors of the ''nouvelle vague'' (New Wave) movement of French cinema in the 1960s (many of whom were also critics at the ''Cahiers du cin ma'') as justification for their intensely personal and idiosyncratic films.
The approach soon found a home in English language film criticism. In the U.K., ''Movie'' adopted auteurism and in the U.S., Andrew Sarris introduced it in the essay, "Notes on the Auteur Theory" in 1962. This essay is where the half French, half English term, "auteur theory," originated. To be classified as an "auteur", according to Sarris, a director must accomplish technical competence in his or her technique, personal style in terms of how the movie looks and feels, and interior meaning (although many of Sarris's auterist criteria were left vague). Later in the decade, Sarris published ''The American Cinema: Directors and Directions, 1929 1968'', which quickly became the unofficial bible of auteurism.
The auteurist criticsTruffaut, Godard, Chabrol, Rohmerwrote mostly about directors (as they were directors themselves), although they also produced some shrewd appreciations of actors. Later writers of the same general school have emphasized the contributions of star personalities like Mae West. However, the stress was on directors, and screenwriters, producers and others have reacted with a good deal of hostility. Writer William Goldman has said that, on first hearing the auteur theory, his reaction was, "What's the punchline?"
Criticism of the "auteur theory"
Starting in the 1960s, there has been a backlash against the auteur theory. Pauline Kael and Sarris feuded in the pages of ''The New Yorker'' and various film magazines. One reason for the backlash is the collaborative aspect of shooting a film (one person cannot do everything) and in the theory's privileging of the role of the director (whose name, at times, has become more important than the movie itself). In Kael's review of Citizen Kane, a classic film for the auteur model, she points out how the film involved the talents of co writer Herman J. Mankiewicz and cinematographer Gregg Toland and would have been hurt without their distinctive ability. Also, the very people who championed the auteur theory backed away from it. Godard handed over much creative control to others (most notably Jean Pierre Gorin) in his later films while, in a twist of irony, Truffaut's later films embraced the same formalism he rejected early on in his career. Also, with costly films like Michael Cimino's Heaven's Gate, the excesses of auteurism not only created uncreative films, they put studios out of business.
However, even with the reevaulation of auteurism, the auteur theory continues to influence new filmmakers to this day.
See also
mise en sc ne
External links
Category:Film theory
id "toc" width "300" align "right" border "0" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0" style "float:right margin: 0em 0em 0em 0.5em width:300px "
! align "center" colspan "2" style "background: efefef " bigAkira Kurosawa big
align "center" colspan "2" Japanese Film director
align "center" colspan "2" style "background: efefef " ''"There is something that might be called cinematic beauty. It can only be expressed in a film, and it must be present for that film to be a moving work. When it is very well expressed, one experiences a particularly deep emotion while watching that film. I believe that it is this quality that draws people to come and see a film, and that it is the hope of attaining this quality that inspires the director to make the film in the first place."''
! '''Born''' 23 March, 1910br Ota, Tokyo, Japan
! '''Died''' 6 September, 1998br Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan
'''Akira Kurosawa''' ( ''Kurosawa Akira'', also in Shinjitai, 23 March, 1910 6 September, 1998) was a prominent Japanese film director, film producer, and screenwriter.
Few filmmakers have had a career so long or so acclaimed as Akira Kurosawa, perhaps Japan's best known filmmaker. His films greatly influenced an entire generation of filmmakers the world over, ranging from George Lucas to Sergio Leone.
His first credited film (''Sugata Sanshiro'') was released in 1943 his last (''Madadayo'') in 1993. His many awards include the Legion d'Honneur and an Oscar for Lifetime Achievement.
Early Career
Kurosawa was born in Omori, Tokyo, the youngest of seven children. He trained as a painter and began work in the film industry as an assistant director to Kajiro Yamamoto in 1936. He made his directorial debut in 1943 with ''Sugata Sanshiro''. His first few films were made under the watchful eye of the wartime Japanese government and sometimes contained nationalistic themes. For instance, ''The Most Beautiful'' is a propaganda film about Japanese women working in an armaments factory. ''Judo Saga 2'' has been held to be explicitly anti American in the way that it portrays Japanese judo as superior to western (American) boxing.
His first post war film ''No regrets for our youth'', by contrast, is critical of the old Japanese regime and is about the wife of a left wing dissident arrested for his political leanings. Kurosawa made several more films which deal with contemporary Japan, most notably ''Drunken Angel'' and ''Stray Dog''. However it was a period film ''Rashomon'' which made him internationally famous and won the Grand Prix at the Venice Film Festival.
Characteristics
Kurosawa is best known for his period pieces or like ''Seven Samurai'' and ''Ran'', but several of his films dealt with contemporary Japan: for example ''Stray Dog'', which looks at the criminal underworld just after the end of the war, and ''Ikiru'', which deals with a Japanese bureaucrat who discovers that he is suffering from cancer but eventually steps out of depression and struggles against bureacratic inertia to leave his small contribution to the world in the form of a small community park before he dies.
Kurosawa had a distinctive cinematic technique, which he had developed by the 1950s, and which gave his films a unique look. He liked using telephoto lenses for the way they flattened the frame and also because he believed that placing cameras farther away from his actors produced better performances. He also liked using multiple cameras, which allowed him to shoot an action from different angles. Another Kurosawa trademark was the use of weather elements to heighten mood: for example the heavy rain in the final battle in ''Seven Samurai'' and the fog in ''Throne of Blood''. Kurosawa also liked using left to right frame wipes as a transition device.
He was known as "Tenno", literally "Emperor", for his dictatorial directing style. He was a perfectionist who spent enormous amounts of time and effort to achieve the desired visual effects. In ''Rashomon'', he dyed the rain water black with calligraphy ink in order to achieve the effect of heavy rain, and ended up using up the entire local water supply of the location area in creating the rainstorm. In ''Throne of Blood'', in the final scene in which Mifune is shot by arrows, Kurosawa used real arrows shot by expert archers from a short range, landing within centimetres of Mifune's body.
Other stories include demanding a stream be made to run in the opposite direction in order to get a better visual effect, and having the roof of a house removed, later to be replaced, because he felt the roof's presence to be unattractive in a short sequence filmed from a train.
Influences
A notable feature of Kurosawa's films is the breadth of his artistic influences. Some of his plots are adaptations of William Shakespeare's works. ''The Bad Sleep Well'' is based on ''Hamlet'', ''Ran'' is based on ''King Lear'' and ''Throne of Blood'' is based on ''Macbeth''. Kurosawa also directed film adaptations of Russian novels, including ''The Idiot'' by Dostoevsky and ''The Lower Depths'' by Maxim Gorky. ''Ikiru'' was based on Leo Tolstoy's ''The Death of Ivan Ilyich''. ''High and Low'' was based on ''King's Ransom'' by American crime writer Ed McBain. ''Stray Dog'' was inspired by the detective novels of Georges Simenon. The American film director John Ford also had a large influence on his work.
Despite criticism by some Japanese critics that Kurosawa was "too Western", he was deeply influenced by Japanese culture as well, including the Kabuki and Noh theaters and the jidaigeki (period drama) genre of Japanese cinema.
His influence
Kurosawa's films had a huge influence on world cinema. Most explicitly, ''Seven Samurai'' was remade as the western ''The Magnificent Seven'', science fiction movie ''Battle Beyond the Stars'', and Pixar's ''A Bug's Life''. It also inspired two Hindi films, Ramesh Sippy's ''Sholay'' and Rajkumar Santhoshi's ''China Gate'', with similar plots. The story has also inspired novels, among them Stephen King's fifth ''Dark Tower'' novel, ''Wolves of the Calla''.
''Yojimbo'' was the basis for the Sergio Leone western ''A Fistful of Dollars'', the Coen Brothers film ''Miller's Crossing'', and the Bruce Willis prohibition era ''Last Man Standing''.
''The Hidden Fortress'' had an influence on George Lucas's earliest ''Star Wars'' film, especially in the characters of R2 D2 and C3PO.
''Rashomon'' not only helped open Japanese cinema to the world but virtually entered the English language as a term for fractured, inconsistent narratives as well as influencing other works, including episodes of television series and many motion pictures.
Collaboration
During his most productive period, from the late 40s to the mid 60s, Kurosawa often worked with the same group of collaborators. Fumio Hayasaka composed music for seven of his films notably ''Rashomon'', ''Ikiru'' and ''Seven Samurai''. Many of Kurosawa's scripts, including ''Throne of Blood'', ''Seven Samurai'' and ''Ran'' were co written with Hideo Oguni. Yoshiro Muraki was Kurosawa's production designer or art director for most of his films after ''Stray Dog'' in 1949 and Asakazu Naki was his cinematographer on 11 films including ''Ikiru'', ''Seven Samurai'' and ''Ran''. Kurosawa also liked recycling the same group of actors, especially Takashi Shimura and Toshiro Mifune. His collaboration with the latter is one of the greatest director actor combinations in cinema history. It began with 1948's ''Drunken Angel'' and ended with 1964's ''Red Beard''.
Later films
Red Beard marked a turning point in Kurosawa's career in more ways than one. In addition to being his last film with Mifune, it was his last in black and white. It was also his last as a major director within the Japanese studio system making roughly a film a year. Kurosawa was signed to direct a Hollywood project, ''Tora! Tora! Tora!'' but 20th Century Fox replaced him with Kinji Fukasaku before it was completed. His next few films were a lot harder to finance and were made at intervals of five years. The first, ''Dodesukaden'', about a group of poor people living around a rubbish dump, was not a success.
After an attempted suicide, Kurosawa went on to make several more films although arranging domestic financing was highly difficult despite his international reputation. ''Dersu Uzala'', made in the Soviet Union and set in Siberia in the early 20th century, was the only Kurosawa film made outside Japan and not in Japanese. It is about the friendship of a Russian explorer and a nomadic hunter. It won the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film. ''Kagemusha'', financed with the help of the director's most famous admirers, George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola, is the story of a man who is the double of a medieval Japanese lord and takes over his identity. Most important was ''Ran'', Kurosawa's version of King Lear set in medieval Japan. It was the great project of Kurosawa's late career, and he spent a decade planning it and trying to obtain funding, which he was finally able to do with the help of the French producer Serge Silberman. The film was a phenomenal international success and is generally considered Kurosawa's last masterpiece.
Kurosawa made three more films during the 1990s which were more personal than his earlier works. ''Dreams'' is a series of vignettes based on his own dreams. ''Rhapsody in August'' is about memories of the Nagasaki atom bomb and his final film: ''Madadayo'' is about a retired teacher and his former students. Kurosawa died in Setagaya, Tokyo, at age 88.
Trivia
Kurosawa was a notoriously lavish gourmet, and spent huge quantities of money on film sets providing an uneatably large quantity and quality of delicacies, especially meat, for the cast and crew.
Awards
1951 Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival for Rashomon
1954 Silver Lion at the Venice Film Festival for Seven Samurai
1976 Academy Award: Best Foreign Language Film for Dersu Uzala
1980 Golden Palm at the Cannes Film Festival for Kagemusha
1982 Career Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival
1984 Legion d'Honneur
1990 Honorary Academy Award
Filmography
as Dersu Uzala (left) and Yury Solomin as Vladimir Arsenyev (right) in the 1975 film ''Dersu Uzala''.
''Sanshiro Sugata'' (1943)
''The Most Beautiful'' (1944)
''Sanshiro Sugata Part II'' aka ''Judo Saga 2'' (1945)
''They Who Step on the Tiger's Tail'' (1945)
''No Regrets for Our Youth'' (1946)
''One Wonderful Sunday'' (1946)
''Drunken Angel'' (1948)
''The Quiet Duel'' (1949)
''Stray Dog'' (1949)
''Scandal'' (1950)
''Rashomon'' (1950)
''The Idiot'' (1951)
''Ikiru'' aka ''To Live'' (1952)
''The Seven Samurai'' (1954)
''Record of a Living Being'' aka ''I Live in Fear'' (1955)
''The Throne of Blood'' aka ''Spider Web Castle'' (1957)
''The Lower Depths'' (1957)
''The Hidden Fortress'' (1958)
''The Bad Sleep Well'' (1960)
''Yojimbo'' aka ''The Bodyguard'' (1961)
''Sanjuro'' (1962)
''High and Low'' aka ''Heaven and Hell'' (1963)
''Red Beard'' (1965)
''Dodesukaden'' (1970)
''Dersu Uzala'' (1975)
''Kagemusha'' aka ''Shadow Warrior'' (1980)
''Ran'' (1985)
''Dreams'' aka ''Akira Kurosawa's Dreams'' (1990)
''Rhapsody in August'' (1991)
''Madadayo'' aka ''Not Yet'' (1993)
Further reading
Mitsuhiro Yoshimoto ''Kurosawa: Film Studies and Japanese Cinema'' ISBN: 0822325195
Akira Kurosawa. ''Something Like An Autobiography''. Vintage Books USA, 1983. ISBN 0394714393
Stephen Prince. ''The Warrior's Camera''. Princeton University Press, 1999. ISBN 0691010463
Donald Richie, Joan Mellen. ''The Films of Akira Kurosawa''. University of California Press, 1999. ISBN 0520220374
Stuart Galbraith IV. ''The Emperor and the Wolf: The Lives and Films of Akira Kurosawa and Toshiro Mifune''. Faber Faber, 2002. ISBN 0571199828
See also
Cinema of Japan
External links
''Ikiru'': The Art of Living
Kurosawa, Akira
Kurosawa, Akira
Kurosawa, Akira
Kurosawa, Akira
ar:
bs:Akira Kurosawa
ca:Akira Kurosawa
cs:Akira Kurosawa
da:Akira Kurosawa
de:Akira Kurosawa
et:Akira Kurosawa
es:Akira Kurosawa
eo:KUROSAWA Akira
fr:Akira Kurosawa
ko:
id:Akira Kurosawa
it:Akira Kurosawa
he:
kn:
ka:
hu:Kuroszava Akira
nl:Akira Kurosawa
ja:
no:Akira Kurosawa
pl:Akira Kurosawa
pt:Akira Kurosawa
ro:Akira Kurosawa
ru: ,
fi:Akira Kurosawa
sv:Akira Kurosawa
tr:Akira Kurosawa
uk:
zh:
'''Ancient Egypt''' was a civilization located along the Lower Nile, reaching from the Nile Delta in the north to as far south as Jebel Barkal at the time of its greatest extension (15th century BC). It lasted for three millennia, from ''circa'' 3200 BC to 343 BC, ending when Artaxerxes III conquered Egypt. As a civilization based on irrigation it is the quintessential example of a hydraulic empire. (4th dynasty) and Great Sphinx of Giza (c.2600 BC or perhaps earlier)
Background
Egypt is a transcontinental nation located mostly in North Africa, with the Sinai Peninsula lying in Asia. The country has shorelines on the Mediterranean Sea, the Red Sea, the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba. It borders Libya to the west Sudan to the south and the Gaza Strip, Palestine and Israel to the east. Ancient Egypt was divided into two kingdoms, known as Upper and Lower Egypt. The Nile river flows northward from a southerly point to the Mediterranean. The Nile river, around which much of the population of the country clusters, has been the lifeline for Egyptian culture since the Stone Age and Naqada cultures.
The area around the Nile was called Kemet ("the black land", in Ancient Egyptian ''Kmt''), the name for the dark soil deposited by the Nile floodwaters. In contrast, the desert was called Deshret ("the red land", in Ancient Egyptian ''Dsrt''), c.f. Herodotus: "Egypt is a land of black soil.... We know that Libya is a redder earth" (Histories, 2:12). The vowels within the consonants K M T are not known with certainty. Coptic, however, provides some indication.
Nomadic hunter gatherers began living along the Nile during the Pleistocene. Traces of these early peoples appear in the form of artifacts and rock carvings along the terraces of the Nile and in the oases. By about 6000 B.C., organized agriculture and large building construction had appeared in the Nile Valley.
People
Many theories have been proposed regarding the origins of early Egyptians, a subject still imbued with controversy today. Controversy over race of Ancient Egyptians has more information about this subject.
Egyptian society was a merging of North and Northeast African as well as Southwest Asian peoples. Modern genetics reveals that the Egyptian population today is characterized by paternal lineages common to North Africans primarily, and to some Near Eastern peoples. Studies based on the maternal lineages closely links modern Egyptians with people from modern Ethiopia , . The ancient Egyptians themselves traced their origin to a land they called Punt, or "Ta Nteru" ("Land of the Gods"), which most Egyptologists locate in the area encompassing the Ethiopian Highlands.
A recent bioanthropological study on the dental morphology of ancient Egyptians confirms dental traits most characteristic of North African and to a lesser extent Southwest Asian populations. The study also establishes biological continuity from the predynastic to the post pharaonic periods. Among the samples included is skeletal material from the Hawara tombs of Fayum, which was found to most closely resemble the Badarian series of the predynastic , . A study based on stature and body proportions suggests that Nilotic or tropical body characteristics were also present in some later groups as the Egyptian empire expanded southward.
Champollion the Younger, who deciphered the Rosetta Stone, claimed in ''Expressions et Termes Particuliers'' that ''kmt'' referred to a 'negroid' population. Modern day professional Egyptologists, anthropologists, and linguists, however, overwhelmingly agree that the term referred to the dark soil of the Nile Valley rather than the people, which contrasted with ''dSrt'' or the "red land" of the Sahara desert.
In c. 450 BC, Herodotus wrote, "the Colchians are Egyptians... on the fact that they are swarthy (''melanchr s'') and wooly haired (''oulothrix'')" (Histories Book 2:104). ''Melanchros'' was also used by Homer to describe the sunburnt complexion of Odysseus (Od. 16.176).
Although analyzing the hair of ancient Egyptian mummies from the Late Middle Kingdom has revealed evidence of a stable diet , mummies from circa 3200 BC show signs of severe anemia and hemolitic disorders . of Memnon.
History
:''Main article: History of ancient Egypt''
Egyptian culture was remarkably stable and changed little over a period of nearly 3000 years. This includes religion, customs, art expression, architecture and social structure.
The history of ancient Egypt proper starts with Egypt as a unified state, which occurred sometime around 3000 BC. Narmer, who unified Upper and Lower Egypt, was the first pharaoh though archaeological evidence indicates that a developed Egyptian society existed for a much longer period (see Predynastic Egypt).
Along the Nile, in 10th millennium BC, a grain grinding culture using the earliest type of sickle blades had been replaced by another culture of hunters, fishers, and gathering peoples using stone tools. Evidence also indicates human habitation in the southwestern corner of Egypt, near the Sudan border, before 8000 BC. Climate changes and or overgrazing around 8000 BC began to desiccate the pastoral lands of Egypt, eventually forming the Sahara (c.2500 BC), and early tribes naturally migrated to the Nile river where they developed a settled agricultural economy and more centralized society (see Nile: History). There is evidence of pastoralism and cultivation of cereals in the East Sahara in the 7th millennium BC. By 6000 BC ancient Egyptians in the southwestern corner of Egypt were herding cattle and constructing large buildings. Mortar (masonry) was in use by 4000 BC. The Predynastic Period continues through this time, variously held to begin with the Naqada culture. Some authorities however begin the Predynastic Period earlier, in the Lower Paleolithic (see Predynastic Egypt).
Egypt unified as a single state circa 3000 BC. Egyptian chronology involves assigning beginnings and endings to various dynasties beginning around this time. The conventional Egyptian chronology is the accepted developments during the 20th century, but do not include any of the major revision proposals that have also been made in that time. Even within a single work, often archeologists will offer several possible dates or even several whole chronologies as possibilities. Consequently, there may be discrepancies between dates shown here and in articles on particular rulers. Often there are also several possible spellings of the names. Typically, Egyptologists divide the history of pharaonic civilization using a schedule laid out first by Manetho's ''Aegyptaica''.
'''List of pharaohs''': The pharaohs stretch from before 3000 BC to around 30 BC.
'''Dynasties''' (see also: List of Egyptian dynasties):
Early Dynastic Period of Egypt (1st to 2nd Dynasties until ca. 27th century BC)
Old Kingdom (3rd to 6th Dynasties 27th to 22nd centuries BC)
First Intermediate Period (7th to 11th Dynasties)
Middle Kingdom of Egypt (11th to 14th Dynasties 20th to 17th centuries BC)
Second Intermediate Period (14th to 17th Dynasties)
Hyksos (15th to 16th Dynasties)
New Kingdom of Egypt (18th to 20th Dynasties 16th to 11th centuries BC)
Third Intermediate Period (21st to 25th Dynasties 11th to 7th centuries BC)
Late Period of Ancient Egypt (26th to 31st Dynasties 7th century BC to 332 BC)
Achaemenid Dynasty
Graeco Roman Egypt (332 BC to AD 639)
Ptolemaic Dynasty
Roman Empire
Taxation
The Egyptian government imposed a number of different taxes upon its people. As there was no known form of currency during that time period, taxes were paid for "in kind" (with produce or work). The Vizier controlled the taxation system through the departments of state. The departments had to report daily on the amount of stock availible, and how much was expected in the future. Taxes were paid for depending on a persons craft or duty. Landowners paid their taxes in grain and other produce grown on their property. Craftsmen paid their taxes in the goods that they produced. Hunters and fishermen paid their taxes with produce from the river, marshes, and desert. One person from every household was required to pay a labor tax by doing public work for a few weeks every year, such as digging canals or mining. However, a richer noble could hire a poorer man to do his labor tax.
Language
Ancient Egyptian constitutes an independent branch of the Afro Asiatic language phylum. Its closest relatives are the Berber, Semitic, and Beja groups of languages. Written records of the Egyptian language have been dated from about 3200 BC, making it one of the oldest and longest documented languages. Scholars group Egyptian into six major chronological divisions:
'''Archaic Egyptian''' (before 3000 BC)
:Consists of inscriptions from the late Predynastic and Early Dynastic period. The earliest known evidence of Egyptian hieroglyphic writing appears on Naqada II pottery vessels.
'''Old Egyptian''' (30002000 BC)
:The language of the Old Kingdom and First Intermediate Period. The Pyramid Texts are the largest body of literature written in this phase of the language. Tomb walls of elite Egyptians from this period also bear autobiographical writings representing Old Egyptian. One of its distinguishing characteristics is the tripling of ideograms, phonograms, and determinatives to indicate the plural. Overall, it does not differ significantly from the next stage.
'''Middle Egyptian''' (20001300 BC)
:Often dubbed '''Classical Egyptian''', this stage is known from a variety of textual evidence in hieroglyphic and hieratic scripts dated from about the Middle Kingdom. It includes funerary texts inscribed on sarcophagi such as the Coffin Texts wisdom texts instructing people on how to lead a life that exemplified the ancient Egyptian philosophical worldview (see the Ipuwer papyrus) tales detailing the adventures of a certain individual, for example the Story of Sinhue medical and scientific texts such as the Edwin Smith Papyrus and the Ebers papyrus and poetic texts praising a god or a pharaoh, like the Hymn to the Nile. The Egyptian vernacular already began to change from the written language as evidenced by some Middle Kingdom hieratic texts, but classical Middle Egyptian continued to be written in formal contexts well into the Late Dynastic period (sometimes referred to as Late Middle Egyptian).
'''Late Egyptian''' (1300700 BC)
:Records of this stage appear in the second part of the New Kingdom, considered by many as the "Golden Age" of ancient Egyptian civilization. It contains a rich body of religious and secular literature, comprising such famous examples as the Story of Wenamun and the Instructions of Ani. It was also the language of Ramesside administration. Late Egyptian is not totally distinct from Middle Egyptian, as many "classicisms" appear in historical and literary documents of this phase. However, the difference between Middle and Late Egyptian is greater than that between Middle and Old Egyptian. It's also a better representative than Middle Egyptian of the spoken language in the New Kingdom and beyond. Hieroglyphic orthography saw an enormous expansion of its graphemic inventory between the Late Dynastic and Ptolemaic periods.
'''Demotic Egyptian''' (7th century BC4th century AD)
'''Coptic''' (3rd17th century AD)
Writing
For many years, the earliest known hieroglyphic inscription was the Narmer Palette, found during excavations at Hierakonpolis (modern Kawm al Ahmar) in the 1890s, which has been dated to c.3200 BC. However recent archaeological findings reveal that symbols on Gerzean pottery, ''c.''4000 BC, resemble the traditional hieroglyph forms . Also in 1998 a German archeological team under Gunter Dreyer excavating at Abydos (modern Umm el Qa'ab) uncovered tomb U j, which belonged to a Predynastic ruler, and they recovered three hundred clay labels inscribed with proto hieroglyphics dating to the Naqada IIIA period, circa 33rd century BC , .
Egyptologists refer to Egyptian writing as '''hieroglyphs''', today standing as the world's earliest known writing system. The hieroglyphic script was partly syllabic, partly ideographic. '''Hieratic''' is a cursive form of Egyptian hieroglyphs and was first used during the First Dynasty (c. 2925 BC c. 2775 BC). The term '''Demotic''', in the context of Egypt, came to refer to both the script and the language that followed the Late Ancient Egyptian stage, i.e. from the Nubian 25th dynasty until its marginalization by the Greek Koine in the early centuries AD. After the conquest of Amr ibn al A'as in the 7th century AD, the Coptic language survived as a spoken language into the Middle Ages. Today, it continues to be the liturgical language of the Christian minority.
Beginning from around 2700 BC, Egyptians used pictograms to represent vocal sounds both vowel and consonant vocalizations (see Hieroglyph: Script). By 2000 BC, 26 pictograms were being used to represent 24 (known) main vocal sounds. The world's oldest known alphabet (c. 1800 BC) is only an abjad system and was derived from these uniliteral signs as well as other Egyptian hieroglyphs.
The hieroglyphic script finally fell out of use around the 4th century AD. Attempts to decipher it began after the 15th century (see ''Hieroglyphica'').
Literature
c. 1800 BC: Story of Sinuhe
c. 1800 BC: Ipuwer papyrus
c. 1600 BC: Westcar Papyrus
c. 1180 BC: Papyrus Harris I
c. 1000 BC: Story of Wenamun
Culture
The Egyptian religions, embodied in Egyptian mythology, were a succession of beliefs held by the people of Egypt, as early as predynastic times and all the way until the coming of Christianity and Islam in the Graeco Roman era. These were conducted by Egyptian priests or magicians, but the use of magic and spells is questioned.
Every animal portrayed and worshipped in ancient Egyptian art, writing and religion is indigenous to Africa, all the way from the predynastic until the Graeco Roman eras, over 3000 years. The Dromedary, domesticated first in Arabia, first appears in Egypt (and North Africa) beginning in the 2nd millennium BCE.
The religious nature of ancient Egyptian civilization influenced its contribution to the arts of the ancient world. Many of the great works of ancient Egypt depict gods, goddesses, and pharaohs, who were also considered divine. Ancient Egyptian art in general is characterized by the idea of order.
Evidence of mummies and pyramids outside ancient Egypt indicate reflections of ancient Egyptian belief values on other prehistoric cultures, transmitted in one way over the Silk Road. Ancient Egypt's foreign contacts included Nubia and Punt to the south, the Aegean and ancient Greece to the north, the Levant and other regions in the Near East to the east, and also Libya to the west.
Some scholars have speculated that Egypt's art pieces are sexually symbolic.
Ancient achievements
right thumb 150px Louvre Museum antiquity
See Predynastic Egypt for inventions and other significant achievements in the Sahara region before the Protodynastic Period.
The art and science of engineering was present in Egypt, such as accurately determining the position of points and the distances between them (known as surveying). These skills were used to outline pyramid bases. The Egyptian pyramids took the geometric shape formed from a polygonal base and a point, called the apex, by triangular faces. Hydraulic Cement was first invented by the Egyptians. The Al Fayyum Irrigation (water works) was one of the main agricultural breadbaskets of the ancient world. There is evidence of ancient Egyptian pharaohs of the twelfth dynasty using the natural lake of the Fayyum as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during the dry seasons. From the time of the First dynasty or before, the Egyptians mined turquoise in Sinai Peninsula.
The earliest evidence (circa 1600 BC) of traditional empiricism is credited to Egypt, as evidenced by the Edwin Smith and Ebers papyri. The roots of the Scientific method may be traced back to the ancient Egyptians. The ancient Egyptians are also credited with devising the world's earliest known alphabet, decimal system and complex mathematical formularizations, in the form of the Moscow and Rhind Mathematical Papyri. An awareness of the golden ratio seems to be reflected in many constructions, such as the Egyptian pyramids.
The art of glass making is of very ancient origin with the Egyptians, as is evident from the glass jars, figures and ornaments discovered in the tombs. The paintings on the tombs have been interpreted as descriptive of the process of glass blowing. These illustrations representing smiths blowing
their fires by means of reeds tipped with clay. Therefore it can be concluded that glass blowing is apparently of Egyptian origin.
Timeline
''(All dates are approximate.)''
Predynastic
''See main article and timeline: Predynastic Egypt.''
3500 BC: Senet, world's oldest (confirmed) board game
3500 BC: Faience, world's earliest known earthenware
Dynastic
.
3300 BC: Bronze works (see Bronze Age)
3200 BC: Egyptian hieroglyphs fully developed (see First dynasty of Egypt)
3200 BC: Narmer Palette, world's earliest known historical document
3100 BC: Decimal system, , world's earliest (confirmed) use
3100 BC: Wine cellars, world's earliest known
3100 BC: Mining, Sinai Peninsula
3050 BC: Shipbuilding in Abydos,
3000 BC: Exports from Nile to Israel: wine (see Narmer)
3000 BC: Copper plumbing (see Copper: History)
3000 BC: Papyrus, world's earliest known paper
3000 BC: Medical Institutions
2900 BC: possible steel: carbon containing iron,
2700 BC: Surgery, world's earliest known
2700 BC: precision Surveying
2700 BC: Uniliteral signs, forming basis of world's earliest known alphabet
2600 BC: Sphinx, still today the world's largest single stone statue
2600s2500 BC: Shipping expeditions: King Sneferu and Pharaoh Sahure. See also , .
2600 BC: Barge transportation, stone blocks (see Egyptian pyramids: Construction)
2600 BC: Pyramid of Djoser, world's earliest known large scale stone building
2600 BC: Menkaure's Pyramid Red Pyramid, world's earliest known works of carved granite
2600 BC: Red Pyramid, world's earliest known "true" smooth sided pyramid solid granite work
2580 BC: Great Pyramid of Giza, the world's tallest structure until AD 1300
2500 BC: Beekeeping,
2400 BC: Astronomical Calendar, used even in the Middle Ages for its mathematical regularity
2200 BC: Beer,
1860 BC: possible Nile Red Sea Canal (Twelfth dynasty of Egypt)
1800 BC: Alphabet, world's oldest known
1800 BC: Berlin Mathematical Papyrus, , 2nd order algebraic equations
1800 BC: Moscow Mathematical Papyrus, generalized formula for volume of frustum
1650 BC: Rhind Mathematical Papyrus: geometry, cotangent analogue, algebraic equations, arithmetic series, geometric series
1600 BC: Edwin Smith papyrus, medical tradition traces as far back as c. 3000 BC
1550 BC: Ebers Medical Papyrus, traditional empiricism world's earliest known documented tumors (see History of medicine)
1500 BC: Glass making, world's earliest known
1258 BC: Peace treaty, world's earliest known (see Ramesses II, )
1160 BC: Turin papyrus, world's earliest known geologic and topographic map
1000 BC: Petroleum tar used in mummification ! world's earliest known use of petroleum???? need documentation
5th4th century BC (or perhaps earlier): battle games ''petteia'' and ''seega'' possible precursors to Chess (see Origins of chess)
Other
c.2500 BC: Westcar Papyrus
c.1800 BC: Ipuwer papyrus
c.1800 BC: Papyrus Harris I
c.1400 BC: Tulli Papyrus
c.1300 BC: Brugsch Papyrus
Unknown date: Rollin Papyrus
! shouldn't this section just be merged withthe above? why list it as Other? ! No achievements are represented here e. g., the Tulli Papyrus does not physically exist! And it is a controversial ancient account of UFOs!
Open problems
There is a question as to the sophistication of ancient Egyptian technology, and there are several open problems concerning real and alleged ancient Egyptian achievements. Certain artifacts and records do not fit with conventional technological development systems. It is not known why there is no neat progression to an Egyptian Iron Age nor why the historical record shows the Egyptians taking so long to begin using iron. It is unknown how the Egyptians shaped and worked granite. The exact date the Egyptians started producing glass is debated.
Some question whether the Egyptians were capable of long distance navigation in their boats and when they became knowledgeable sailors. It is contentiously disputed as to whether or not the Egyptians had some understanding of electricity and if the Egyptians used engines or batteries. The relief at Dendera is interpreted in various ways by scholars. The topic of the Saqqara Bird is controversial, as is the extent of the Egyptians' understanding of aerodynamics. It is unknown for certain if the Egyptians had kites or gliders.
Beekeeping is known to have been particularly well developed in Egypt, as accounts are given by several Roman writers Virgil, Gaius Julius Hyginus, Varro and Columella. It is unknown whether Egyptian beekeeping developed independently or as an import from Southern Asia.
See also
List of Ancient Egyptians
List of pharaohs
Egyptology
Unsolved problems in Egyptology
History of Egypt
List of Ancient Egyptian sites
Egyptian Museum
Race of the Ancient Egyptians
Egypt in the European imagination
Further reading
John Baines Jaromir Malek, ''The Cultural Atlas of Ancient Egypt'', revised edition, Facts on File, 2000. ISBN 0816040362
Barry Kemp, ''Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization'', Routledge, 1991. ISBN 0415063469
Bill Manley (ed.), ''The Seventy Great Mysteries of Ancient Egypt''. Thames Hudson, ISBN 0500051232
Ian Shaw, ''The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt'', Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0192804588
External links
maintained by the British Museum, this site provides a useful introduction to Ancient Egypt for older children and young adolescents
articles and resources from About Archaeology
provides a reliable general overview and further links
A comprehensive consise educational website focusing on the basic and the advanced in all aspects of Ancient Egypt
provides a comprehensive listing of resources relating to the archaeology of Ancient Egypt
maintained by Dr Nigel Strudwick, offers one reliable guide to online documentation of Ancient Egypt
although focusing on the Theban region (modern Luxor), this site holds much of general interest relating to Ancient Egypt
children's site
Notes
! How to add a footnote:
NOTE: Footnotes in this article use names, not numbers. Please see Wikipedia:Footnotes for details.
1) Assign your footnote a unique name, for example TheSun Dec9.
2) Add the macro to the body of the article, where you want the new footnote.
3) Take note of the name of the footnote that immediately precedes yours in the article body.
4) Add to the list, immediately below the footnote you noted in step 3. No need to re number anything!
5) Multiple footnotes to the same reference: see Wikipedia:Footnotes for a how to.
NOTE: It is important to add footnotes in the right order in the list!
ar:
bg:
ca:Antic Egipte
da:Det gamle gypten
de:Altes gypten
eo:Egipta civilizo
es:Antiguo Egipto
fa:
fi:Muinainen Egypti
fr: gypte antique
gl:Antigo Exipto
he:
hu: kori Egyiptom
ja:
ko:
lv:Sen ipte
mk:
ms:Mesir purba
nds:Ole gypten
nl:Oude Egypte
no:Oldtidens Egypt
oc:Egipte
pl:Staro ytny Egipt
ru:
sl:Stari Egipt
sr:
uk:
zh:
'''Analog Brothers''' is an experimental rap crew featuring Ice Oscillator a.k.a. Ice T (keyboards, drums, voc), Keith Korg a.k.a. Kool Keith (bass, strings, vocals), Mark Moog (drums, ''violyns'' and vocals) and Silver Synth (''synthasizer'', ''lazar bell'' and vocals). Their CD ''Pimp To Eat'' featured guest appearances by various members of the Rhyme Syndicate, Odd Oberheim, Jacky Jasper, D.J. Cisco from S.M. and H Bomb, the Synth a Size Sisters and Teflon.
Discography
2000 ''Pimp to Eat'' (Ground Control Nu Gruv)
External links
at Discogs
Category:American hip hop groups
Category:Alternative hip hop musicians
DiseaseDisorder infobox
Name Motor neurone disease
ICD10
ICD9
The '''''motor neurone diseases''''' (MND) are a group of progressive neurological disorders that destroy motor neurons, the cells that control voluntary muscle activity such as speaking, walking, breathing, and swallowing. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), sometimes called Lou Gehrig's disease, progressive muscular atrophy (PMA), spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), progressive or pseudo bulbar palsy (PBP) and primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) are all forms of motor neurone disease.
Terminology
In this article, MND refers to a group of diseases which affect the motor neurons. In the United States, the term ALS is more commonly used, where it is also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, after the baseball player. Although previously described by other neurologists of the 19th century, it was Jean Martin Charcot, a French neurologist, who suggested grouping together a number of disparate conditions all affecting the lateral horn of the spinal cord in 1869. In France the disease is sometimes known as Maladie de Charcot (Charcot's disease), although it may also be referred to by the direct translation of ALS, Sclerose Laterale Amyotrophique (SLA). To help prevent confusion, the annual scientific research conference dedicated to the study of MND is called the International ALS MND Symposium.
Signs and symptoms
Neurological examination presents specific signs associated with upper and lower motor neuron degeneration. Signs of upper motor neuron damage include spasticity, brisk reflexes and the Babinski sign. Signs of lower motor neuron damage include weakness and muscle atrophy.
Note that every muscle group in the body requires both upper and lower motor neurons to function. It is a common misconception that "upper" motor neurons control the arms, whilst "lower" motor neurons control the legs. The signs described above can occur in any muscle group, including the arms, legs, torso, and bulbar region.
Symptoms usually present between the ages of 50 70, and include progressive weakness, muscle wasting, and muscle fasciculations spasticity or stiffness in the arms and legs and overactive tendon reflexes. Patients may present with symptoms as diverse as a dragging foot, unilateral muscle wasting in the hands, or slurred speech.
The symptoms described above may resemble a number of other rare diseases, known as "MND Mimic Disorders". These include, but are not limited to multifocal motor neuropathy, kennedy's disease, hereditary spastic paraplegia, spinal muscular atrophy and monomelic amyotrophy. A small subset of familial MND cases occur in children, such as "juvenile ALS", Madras syndrome, and individuals who have inherited the ALS2 gene. However, these are not typically referred to as MND, but by their specific names.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of MND is a clinical one, established by a neurologist on the basis of history and neurological examination. There is no diagnostic test for MND. Investigations such as blood tests, electromyography (EMG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and sometmies genetic testing are useful to rule out other disorders that may mimic MND. However, the diagnosis of MND remains a clinical one. Having excluded other diseases, a relatively rapid progression of symptoms is a strong diagnostic factor. Although an individual's progression may sometimes "plateau", it will not recover or slow down. A set of diagnostic criteria called the El Escorial criteria have been defined by the World Federation of Neurologists for use in research, particularly as inclusion exclusion criteria for clinical trials. Due to a lack of clincial diagnostic criteria, some neurologists use the El Escorial criteria during the diagnostic process, although strictly speaking this is functionality creep.
MND in the presence of both upper and lower motor neuron degeneration is ALS. Where the illness affects only the upper motor neurons it is PLS, and where it affects only the lower motor neurons it is PMA. Progressive bulbar palsy is degneration of the lower motor neurons innervating the bulbar region (mouth, face, and throat), whilst pseudobulbar palsy refers to degeneration of the upper motor neurons to the same region.
Prognosis
Most cases of MND progess quite quickly, with noticeable decline occuring over the course of months. Although symptoms may present in one region, they will typically spread. If restricted to one side of the body they are more likely to progress to the same region on the other side of the body before progressing to a new region. After several years, most patients require help to carry out activities of daily living such as self care, feeding, and transportation.
MND is typically fatal within 2 5 years. Around 50 die within 14 months of diagnosis. The remaining 50 will not necessarily die within the next 14 months as the distribution is significantly skewed. As a rough estimate, 1 in 5 patients survive for 5 years, and 1 in 10 patients survive 10 years. Stephen Hawking is a well known example of a person with MND, and has lived for more than 40 years with the disease.
Mortality results when the muscles that control breathing are no longer able to expel carbon dioxide. One exception is PLS, which may last for upwards of 25 years. Given the typical age of onset, this effectively leaves most PLS patients with a normal life span. PLS can progress to ALS, decades later.
Pathology
Causes
About 90 of cases of MND are "sporadic", meaning that the patient has no family history of ALS and the case appears to have occurred with no known cause. Genetic factors are suspected to be important in determining an individual's susceptibility to disease, and there is some weak evidence to suggest that onset can be "triggered" by as yet unknown environmental factors (see 'Epidemiology' below).
Approximately 10 of cases are "familial MND", defined either by a family history of MND or by testing positive for a known genetic mutation associated with the disease. The following genes are known to be linked to ALS: Cu Zn superoxide dismutase ''SOD1'', ''ALS2'', ''NEFH''(a small number of cases), senataxin (SETX) and vesicle associated protein B (''VAPB'').
Of these, SOD1 mutations account for some 20 of familial MND cases. The ''SOD1'' gene codes for the enzyme superoxide dismutase, a free radical scavenger that reduces the oxidative stress of cells throughout the body. So far over 100 different mutations in the SOD1 gene have been found, all of which cause some form of ALS(). In North America, the most commonly occurring mutation is known as A4V and occurs in up to 50 of SOD1 cases. In people of Scandinavian extraction there is a relatively benign mutation called D90A which is associated with a slow progression. Future research is concentrating on identifying new genetic mutations and the clinical syndrome associated with them. Familial MND may also confer a higher risk of developing cognitive changes such as frontotemporal dementia or executive dysfunction (see 'extra motor change in MND' below).
It is thought that ''SOD1'' mutations confer a toxic gain, rather than a loss, of function to the enzyme. SOD1 mutations may increase the propensity for the enzyme to form protein aggregates which are toxic to nerve cells.
Pathophysiology
Skeletal muscles are innervated by a group of neurons (''lower motor neurons'') located on the ventral surface of the spinal cord which project to the muscle cells. These nerve cells are themselves innervated by the corticospinal tract or ''upper motor neurons'' that project from the motor cortex of the brain. On macroscopic pathology, there is a degeneration of the ventral horns of the spinal cord, as well as atrophy of the ventral roots. In the brain, atrophy may be present in the frontal and temporal lobes. On microscopic examination, neurones may show spongiosis, the presence of astrocytes, and a number of inclusions including characteristic "skein like" inclusions, bunina bodies, and vacuolisation.
There is a role in excitotoxicity and oxidative stress, presumably secondary to mitochondrial dysfunction. In animal models, death by apoptosis has also been identified.
Emotional lability pseudobulbar affect
Around a third of all MND patients experiece labile affect, also known as emotional lability, pseudobulbar affect, or pathological laughter and crying. Patients with pseudobulbar palsy are particuarly likely to be affected, as are patients with PLS.
Extra motor change in MND
Cognitive change can and does occur in between 3350 of patients. A small proportion exhibit a form of frontotemporal dementia characterised by behavioural abnormalities such as disinhibition, apathy, and personality changes. A small proportion of patients may also suffer from an aphasia, which causes difficulty in naming specific objects. A larger proportion (up to 50 ) suffer from a milder version of cognitive change which primarily affects what is known as executive function. Briefly, this is the ability of an individual to initiate, inhibit, sustain, and switch attention and is involved in the organisation of complex tasks down to smaller components. Often patients with such changes find themselves unable to do the family finances or drive a car. Depression is surprisingly rare in MND (around 520 ) relative to the frequency with which it is found in other, less severe, neurological disorders e.g. 50 in multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, 20 in Epilepsy. Depression does not necessarily increase as the symptoms progress, and in fact many patients report being happy with their quality of life despite profound disability. This may reflect the use of coping strategies such as reevaluating what is important in life.
Although traditionally thought only to affect the motor system, sensory abnormalities are not necessarily absent, with some patients finding altered sensation to touch and heat, found in around 10 of patients. Patients with a predominantly upper motor neurone syndrome, and particularly PLS, often report an enhanced startle reflex to loud noises.
Neuroimaging and neuropathology has demonstrated extra motor changes in the frontal lobes including the inferior frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, and superior temporal gyrus. The degree of pathology in these areas has been directly related to the degree of cognitive change experienced by the patient, if any. Patients with MND and dementia have been shown to exhibit marked frontotemporal lobe atrophy as revealed by MRI or SPECT neuroimaging.
Epidemiology
The incidence of MND is approximately 15 out of 100,000 people. Men have a slightly higher incidence rate than women. Approximately 5,600 cases are diagnosed in the U.S. every year. By far the greatest risk factor is age, with symptoms typically presenting between the ages of 50 70. Cases under the age of 50 years are called "young onset MND", whilst incidence rates appear to tail off after the age of 85.
Tentative environmental risk factors identified so far include: exposure to severe electrical shock leading to coma, having served in the first Gulf War, and playing professional football (soccer). However, these findings have not been firmly identified and more research is needed.
There are three "hot spots" of MND in the world. One is in the Kii pensinula of Japan, one amongst a tribal population in Papua New Guinea. Until the 1960s, Chamorro inhabitants from the island of Guam in the Pacific Ocean had an increased risk of developing a form of MND known as Guamanian ALS PD dementia complex or "lytico bodig", but since then the incidence rates have returned to near normal, and nobody born since 1940 has developed the disease. Putative theories involve neurotoxins in local wildlife including cycad nuts and other traditional foodstuffs.
Treatment
Currently, there is no cure for ALS. The only drug that affects the course of the disease is riluzole. The drug functions by blocking the effects of the neurotransmitter glutamate, and is thought to extend the lifespan of an ALS patient by only a few months.
The lack of effective medications to slow the progression of ALS does not mean that patients with ALS cannot be medically cared for. Instead, treatment of patients with ALS focuses on the relief of symptoms associated with the disease. This involves a variety of health professionals including neurologists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, dieticians, respiratory therapists, social workers, palliative care specialists, specialist nurses and psychologists. A list of neurology clinics that specialize in the care of patients with ALS can be found on the World Federation of Neurology website (http: www.wfnals.org clinics ).
Research Efforts
The search for a drug that will slow ALS disease progression is underway. For example, recent research using mouse models suggests that minocycline, a common antibiotic, may also be effective in extending the lifespan of ALS sufferers. This drug must pass clinical trials with ALS patients before it may be used as a general treatment for ALS.
Minocycline extends the lifespan of ALS mice with SOD1 mutations, but it does not prevent their eventual death. Other agents that are currently in trials include ceftriaxone, arimoclomol, IGF 1 and coenzyme Q10 to name but a few. A list of US based clinical ALS trials may be found at www.clinicaltrials.org or by contacting your local ALS MND charity.
Etymology
''Amyotrophic'' comes from the Greek language: ''A '' means "no", ''myo'' refers to "muscle", and ''trophic'' means "nourishment" ''amyotrophic'' therefore means "no muscle nourishment," which describes the characteristic atrophication of the sufferer's disused muscle tissue. ''Lateral'' identifies the areas in a person's spinal cord where portions of the nerve cells that are affected are located. As this area degenerates it leads to scarring or hardening ("sclerosis") in the region.
History and prominent patients
U.S. baseball player Lou Gehrig brought national and international attention to the disease in 1939 when he abruptly retired after being diagnosed with ALS MND he would die two years later. Former guitar virtuoso Jason Becker, theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking, and ex Celtic football player Jimmy Johnstone also suffer from the disease.
Founder of care homes Leonard Cheshire VC, owner from 1957 1966 of Athelhampton House in Dorset Sir Robert Cooke F.R.C.S., theoretical physicist Victor Emery, Rangers footballer Sam English, Hall of Fame pitcher Jim "Catfish" Hunter, blues singer and guitarist Leadbelly, Chinese Chairman Mao Zedong, jazz giant Charles Mingus, Hollywood actor David Niven, legendary Leeds United manager Don Revie, teacher and book subject Morrie Schwartz, American television actor Lane Smith, linguist Larry Trask, ''Guardian'' journalist Jill Tweedie, avant garde guitarist Derek Bailey, American soap opera veteran Michael Zaslow, and libertarian writer, politician, and investment analyst, Harry Browne died from the disease.
Diane Pretty was a British woman with the disease who was involved in a prominent right to die case in the early 2000s.
See also
Kennedy disease
Monomelic amyotrophy
Primary lateral sclerosis
Progressive muscular atrophy
Riluzole
Sources and references
:Motor Neuron Diseases information sheet compiled by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
Some information gathered from Dr. M Norenberg, University of Miami (October 26 2004).
''Crossing the Finishing LineLast Thoughts of Leonard Cheshire VC'', ed. Reginald C. Fuller (London 1998).
''De Standaard'' (Dutch language newspaper), 12 September 2005.
Zhu S, Stavrovskaya IG, Drozda M, Kim BY, Ona V, Li M, Sarang S, Liu AS, Hartley DM, Wu du C, Gullans S, Ferrante RJ, Przedborski S, Kristal BS, Friedlander RM. "Minocycline inhibits cytochrome c release and delays progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice." Nature. 2002 May 2 417(6884):74 8.
Van Den Bosch L, Tilkin P, Lemmens G, Robberecht W. "Minocycline delays disease onset and mortality in a transgenic model of ALS." Neuroreport. 2002 12 June 13(8):1067 70.
Kriz J, Nguyen MD, Julien JP. "Minocycline slows disease progression in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis." Neurobiol Dis. 2002 Aug 10(3):268 78.
Information about Clinical Trials
Other Resources
Australian group seeking to find a cure for familial Motor Neurone Disease.
Category:Disability
Category:Neurological disorders
de:Amyotrophe Lateralsklerose
es:Esclerosis Lateral Amiotr fica
fr:Scl rose lat rale amyotrophique
ja:
nl:Amyotrofische laterale sclerose
no:Amyotrofisk lateral sklerose
sv:Amyotrofisk lateralskleros
zh:
:''For the traditional ordering of the letters of the Arabic alphabet, see Abjadi order, Abjad numerals.''
An '''abjad''' is a type of writing system in which there is one symbol per consonantal phoneme, sometimes also called a '''consonantary'''. Abjads differ from alphabets, in that in an abjad, each basic grapheme represents a consonant, although vowels may be indicated by vowel marks on the basic graphemes. An alphabet has basic graphemes for both consonants and vowels. Abjads also differ from abugidas. In an abjad, each basic grapheme represents only a consonant. In an abugida, each basic grapheme represents a syllable consisting of a consonant and a vowel the same consonant with a different vowel or with no vowel is represented by a modified or marked form of the same basic grapheme.
Etymology
The system takes its name from the first nonsense 'word' of the mnemonic sequence for the letters of the Arabic alphabet in the older abjadi order. It has been suggested that the word 'Abjad' may have earlier roots in Phoenician or Ugaritic.
History
All known abjads belong to the Semitic family of scripts, and derive from the original Northern Linear Abjad. The reason for this is that Semitic languages have a morphemic structure which makes the denotation of vowels redundant or unnecessary in most cases.
Impure abjads
"Impure" abjads (such as Arabic) may have characters for some vowels as well (called ''matres lectionis'', 'mothers of reading', singular mater lectionis), or optional vowel diacritics, or both however, the term's originator, Peter T. Daniels, insists that it should be applied only to scripts entirely lacking in vowel indicators, thus excluding Arabic, Hebrew, and Syriac.
Impure abjads develop when, due to phonetic change, a previous consonant or diphthong becomes a vowel. Later generations, who receive their orthography without knowing that letter originally signified a consonant there, understand it to mean a vowel as it is in their spoken language. They then use that letter as a vowel in other places where it was never a consonant. For example, the Hebrew word probably underwent the following pronunciation change: . The , which was originally the consonant w, became the vowel o. Later, probably in the Second Temple period, the vowel use of was expanded to places where no consonant ever existed.
Addition of vowels
Many scripts derived from abjads have been extended with vowel symbols to become full alphabets. This has mostly happened when the script was adapted to a non Semitic language, the most famous case being the derivation of the Greek alphabet from the Phoenician abjad. The Greeks did not need the letters for the guttural (, , , ) and co articulated (, ) consonants. They dropped some of them and turned others into vowels.
In other cases, the vowel signs come in the form of little points or hooks attached to the consonant letters, producing an abugida such as the system of writing Amharic (written using the Ge'ez alphabet, which was formerly an abjad before a vocalization occurred sometime after the 5th century BCE but before the 4th century CE).
Related concepts
Surprisingly, many non Semitic languages such as English can be written without vowels and read with little difficulty. For example, the previous sentence could be written ''Srprsngly, mny nn Smtc lnggs sch s nglsh cn b wrttn wtht vwls nd rd wth lttl dffclty.'' This fact can be used to semi bowdlerise offensive language, a practice known as disemvoweling.
Some usages of 1337speak drop vowels, especially for small words.
See also
Abjad numerals
References
, v. 1, p. 28.
External links
Category:Writing systems
br:Abjad
ca:Abjad
de:Konsonantenschrift
es:Abyad
fa:
fr:Abjad
gl:Abxad
wa:Abdjad
An '''abugida''', '''alphasyllabary''', or '''syllabics''' is a writing system composed of signs (graphemes) denoting consonants with an inherent following vowel, which are consistently modified to indicate other vowels, or, in some cases, the lack of a vowel. Examples include the various scripts of the Brahmic family, Ethiopic Ge ez, and Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics.
A typical abugida is Devanagari. There is no basic sign representing the consonant ''k '' rather the unmodified letter represents the syllable ''ka '' the ''a'' is the so called "inherent" vowel. The vowel may be changed by adding vowel marks to the basic character, producing other syllables beginning with ''k ,'' such as ''ki'', ''ku'', ''ke'', ''ko''. These diacritics are applied systematically to other consonantal characters. For example, from ''la'' is formed ''li'', ''lu'', ''le'', ''lo''. Such a consonant with either an inherent or marked vowel is called an akshara.
In many abugidas, there is also a diacritic to suppress the inherent vowel, yielding the bare consonant. In Devanagari, is ''k,'' and is ''l''. This is called the ''virama'' in Sanskrit, or ''halant'' in Hindi. It may be used to form consonant clusters, or to indicate that a consonant occurs at the end of a word. Other means of expressing these functions include special conjunct forms in which two or more consonant characters are merged to express a cluster, such as Devanagari: ''kla.'' (Note that on some fonts display this as followed by , rather than forming a conjunct.)
The diacritics may appear above ( ), below ( ), to the left ( ), or to the right ( ) of the consonantal character, or may surround it as in Tamil ''kau,'' from ''ka''. In many of the Brahmic scripts, a syllable beginning with a cluster is treated as a single character for purposes of vowel marking, so a vowel marker like '' i,'' falling before the character it modifies, may appear several positions before the place where it is pronounced. For example, the game cricket in Hindi is ''krike '' the diacritic for i appears before the consonant cluster kr , not before the r . A more unusual example is seen in the Batak alphabet: Here the syllable ''bim'' is written ''ba ma i (virama)''. That is, the vowel diacritic and virama are both written after the consonants for the whole syllable.
In Ge ez, the prototype abugida, the form of the letter itself may be altered. For example, ''h '' (basic form), ''hu'' (with a right side diacritic that does not alter the letter), ''hi'' (with a subdiacritic compresses the letter, so that the whole fidel (akshara) occupies the same amount of space), ''he'' (where the letter is modified with a kink in the left arm).
In the family of abugidas known as Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics, vowels are indicated by modification (rotation and reflection) of the akshara. For example, Inuktitut ''pi,'' ''pu,'' ''pa '' ''ti,'' ''tu,'' ''ta''.
The R ng script used for the Lepcha language goes further than other abugidas in that each akshara is a full syllable: Not only the vowel, but any final consonant is indicated by a diacritic. For example, the syllable sok would written as something like , here with an underring representing o and an overcross representing the diacritic for final k . There are several abugidas of Indonesia which also indicate final consonants with diacritics, but usually these are restricted to one or two nasals such as .
The Pahawh Hmong script represents both consonants and vowels with full letters. However, the graphic order is vowel consonant even though they are pronounced as consonant vowel. This is rather like the o vowel in the Indic abugidas. Pahawh Hmong is unusual in that, while the inherent vowel au is unwritten, so is the inherent consonant k . For the syllable kau , which requires one or the other of the inherent sounds to be overt, it is au that is written. That is, a Pahawh akshara appears to be a vowel with an inherent consonant rather than the other way around.
It is difficult to draw a dividing line between abugidas and other segmental scrips. For example, the Meroitic script of ancient Sudan did not indicate an inherent ''a'' (one symbol stood for both ''m'' and ''ma,'' for example), and is thus similar to Brahmic family abugidas. However, the other vowels were indicated with full letters, not diacritics or modification, so the system was essentially an alphabet that did not bother to write the most common vowel.
Thaana is also like an abugida in that vowels are marked with diacritics. However, all vowels are marked, as is the absence of a vowel there is no inherent vowel. Normally no letter may occur without a diacritic. That is, it is equivalent to an abjad with obligatory vowel marking, like the Arabic alphabet as used for Kurdish in Iraq, as is thus essentially alphabetic. Note that it developed among a population that was already literate with an abugida for their language.
Several systems of shorthand use diacritics for vowels, but they do not have an inherent vowel, and are thus more similar to Thaana and Kurdish than to the Brahmic scripts. The Pollard script, which was based on shorthand, also uses diacritics for vowels the placements of the vowel relative to the consonant indicates tone.
As the term ''alphasyllabary'' suggests, abugidas have been considered an intermediate step between alphabets and syllabaries. Historically, abugidas appear to have evolved from abjads (vowelless alphabets). They contrast with syllabaries, where there is a distinct symbol for each syllable or consonant vowel combination, and where these have no systematic similarity to each other. Compare the Devanagari examples above to sets of syllables in the Japanese hiragana syllabary: ''ka'', ''ki'', ''ku'', ''ke'', ''ko'' have nothing in common to indicate ''k '' while ''ra'', ''ri'', ''ru'', ''re'', ''ro'' have neither anything in common for ''r'', nor anything do indicate that they have the same vowels as the ''k'' set.
The term ''abugida'' is taken from a conventional name for the Ge'ez script, derived from its first four letters ( ) as ordered
in some religious contexts. This order corresponds to the ancestral Semitic character order, ''aleph, beth, gimel, daleth,'' or A B C D.
Historically, abugidas appear to have first evolved from abjads (perhaps Aramaic) with the Kharo h and Br hm scripts. The Kharosthi family does not survive today, but Brahmi's descendents include most of the modern scripts of South and Southeast Asia. Canadian Syllabics was derived from Devanagari, and is thus in the Brahmic family, or was at least influenced by Devanagari in its creation. Although Ge ez derived from a different abjad, its evolution into an abugida may have been due to the influence of Christian missionaries from India.
Partial list of abugidas
True abugidas
Brahmic family, from the 4th (maybe 6th) century BC
Balinese alphabet
Bengali
Burmese
Devanagari (used to write Sanskrit, Pali, modern Hindi, Marathi etc.)
Gujarati
Gurmukhi script
Kannada
Khmer
Lao
Malayalam
Siddham used to write Sanskrit
Sinhala
Tamil
Telugu
Thai
Tibetan
Kharo h (extinct), from the 3rd century BC
Ge'ez (Ethiopic), from the 4th century AD
Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics
Baybayin, pre colonial script of Tagalog
Abugida like scripts
Meroitic (extinct)
Thaana
Pitman shorthand
Pollard script
External links
list of syllabaries and abugidas, including examples of various writing systems
Category:Writing systems
am:
br:Abugida
ca:Abugida
de:Abugida
es:Abugida
fr:Alphasyllabaire
gl:Alfasilabario
ko:
nl:Abugida
sl:Abugida
DiseaseDisorder infobox
Name Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
ICD10 B24
ICD9
'''Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome''', or '''acquired immune deficiency syndrome''' (or acronym '''AIDS''' or '''Aids'''), is a collection of symptoms and infections resulting from the specific damage to the immune system caused by infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).ref name Marx
cite journal
author Marx, J. L. title New disease baffles medical community
journal Science year 1982 pages 618 621 volume 217 issue 4560 id
ref It results from the latter stages of advanced HIV infection in humans, thereby leaving compromised individuals prone to opportunistic infections and tumors. Although treatments for both AIDS and HIV exist to slow the virus' progression in a human patient, there is no known cure.
Most researchers believe that HIV originated in sub Saharan Africa ref name Gao
cite journal
author Gao, F., Bailes, E., Robertson, D. L., Chen, Y., Rodenburg, C. M., Michael, S. F., Cummins, L. B., Arthur, L. O., Peeters, M., Shaw, G. M., Sharp, P. M. and Hahn, B. H.
title Origin of HIV 1 in the Chimpanzee Pan troglodytes troglodytes
journal Nature year 1999 pages 436 441 volume 397 issue 6718 id
ref during the twentieth century it is now a global epidemic. UNAIDS and the World Health Organization (WHO) estimate that AIDS has killed more than 25 million people since it was first recognized on December 1, 1981, making it one of the most destructive pandemics in recorded history. In 2005 alone, AIDS claimed between an estimated 2.8 and 3.6 million, of which more than 570,000 were children.ref name UNAIDS
cite web
author UNAIDS publisher year 2005
url http: www.unaids.org Epi2005 doc EPIupdate2005 pdf en epi update2005 en.pdf
title AIDS epidemic update, 2005 accessdate 2006 01 17
ref In countries where there is access to antiretroviral treatment, both mortality and morbidity of HIV infection have been reduced ref name Palella
cite journal
author Palella, F. J. Jr, Delaney, K. M., Moorman, A. C., Loveless, M. O., Fuhrer, J., Satten, G. A., Aschman and D. J., Holmberg, S. D.
title Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators
journal N. Engl. J. Med year 1998 pages 853 860 volume 338 issue 13 id
ref. However, side effects of these antiretrovirals have also caused problems such as lipodystrophy, dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance and an increase in cardiovascular risks ref name Montessori
cite journal
author Montessori, V., Press, N., Harris, M., Akagi, L., Montaner, J. S.
title Adverse effects of antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection.
journal CMAJ year 2004 pages 229 238 volume 170 issue 2 id
ref. The difficulty of consistently taking the medicines has also contributed to the rise of viral escape and resistance to the medicines ref name Becker
cite journal
author Becker, S., Dezii, C. M., Burtcel, B., Kawabata, H. and Hodder, S.
title Young HIV infected adults are at greater risk for medication nonadherence
journal MedGenMed year 2002 pages 21 volume 4 issue 3 id
ref.
Infection by HIV
of HIV 1 budding from cultured lymphocyte.
AIDS is the most severe manifestation of infection with HIV. HIV is a retrovirus that primarily infects vital components of the human immune system such as CD4 T cells, macrophages and dendritic cells. It also directly and indirectly destroys CD4 T cells. As CD4 T cells are required for the proper functioning of the immune system, when enough CD4 cells have been destroyed by HIV, the immune system barely works, leading to AIDS. Acute HIV infection progresses over time to clinical latent HIV infection and then to early symptomatic HIV infection and later, to AIDS, which is identified on the basis of the amount of CD4 positive cells in the blood and the presence of certain infections.
In the absence of antiretroviral therapy, progression from HIV infection to AIDS occurs at a median of between nine to ten years and the median survival time after developing AIDS is only 9.2 months ref name Morgan2
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B., Okongo, J. M., Lubega, R. and Whitworth, J. A.
title HIV 1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?
journal AIDS year 2002 pages 597 632 volume 16 issue 4 id
ref. However, the rate of clinical disease progression varies widely between individuals, from two weeks up to 20 years. Many factors affect the rate of progression. These include factors that influence the body's ability to defend against HIV, including the infected person's genetic inheritance, general immune function ref name Clerici
cite journal
author Clerici, M., Balotta, C., Meroni, L., Ferrario, E., Riva, C., Trabattoni, D., Ridolfo, A., Villa, M., Shearer, G.M., Moroni, M. and Galli, M.
title Type 1 cytokine production and low prevalence of viral isolation correlate with long term non progression in HIV infection
journal AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. year 1996 pages 1053 1061 volume 12 issue 11
id
refref name Morgan
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B. and Whitworth, J. A.
title Progression to symptomatic disease in people infected with HIV 1 in rural Uganda: prospective cohort study
journal BMJ year 2002 pages 193 196 volume 324 issue 7331
id
cite journal
author Tang, J. and Kaslow, R. A.
title The impact of host genetics on HIV infection and disease progression in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy
journal AIDS year 2003 pages S51 S60 volume 17 issue Suppl 4
id
ref, access to health care, age and other coexisting infections ref name Morgan2
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B., Okongo, J. M., Lubega, R. and Whitworth, J. A.
title HIV 1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?
journal AIDS year 2002 pages 597 632 volume 16 issue 4
id
refref name Gendelman
cite journal
author Gendelman, H. E., Phelps, W., Feigenbaum, L., Ostrove, J. M., Adachi, A., Howley, P. M., Khoury, G., Ginsberg, H. S. and Martin, M. A.
title Transactivation of the human immunodeficiency virus long terminal repeat sequences by DNA viruses
journal Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. year 1986 pages 9759 9763 volume 83 issue 24
id
refref name Bentwich
cite journal
author Bentwich, Z., Kalinkovich., A. and Weisman, Z.
title Immune activation is a dominant factor in the pathogenesis of African AIDS.
journal Immunol. Today year 1995 pages 187 191 volume 16 issue 4
id
ref. Different strains of HIV ref name Quinones
cite journal
author Qui ones Mateu, M. E., Mas, A., Lain de Lera, T., Soriano, V., Alcami, J., Lederman, M. M. and Domingo, E.
title LTR and tat variability of HIV 1 isolates from patients with divergent rates of disease progression
journal Virus Research year 1998 pages 11 20 volume 57 issue 1
id
refref name Campbell
cite journal
author Campbell, G. R., Pasquier, E., Watkins, J., Bourgarel Rey, V., Peyrot, V., Esquieu, D., Barbier, P., de Mareuil, J., Braguer, D., Kaleebu, P., Yirrell, D. L. and Loret E. P.
title The glutamine rich region of the HIV 1 Tat protein is involved in T cell apoptosis
journal J. Biol. Chem. year 2004 pages 48197 48204 volume 279 issue 46
id
ref may also cause different rates of clinical disease progression.
Diagnosis
AIDS and HIV case definitions
Since June 18, 1981, many different definitions have been developed for epidemiological surveillance such as the Bangui definition and the 1994 expanded World Health Organization AIDS case definition. However, these were never intended to be used for clinical staging of patients, for which they are neither sensitive nor specific. The World Health Organizations (WHO) staging system for HIV infection and disease, using clinical and laboratory data, can be used in developing countries and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Classification System can be used in developed nations.
WHO Disease Staging System for HIV Infection and Disease
In 1990, the World Health Organization (WHO) grouped these infections and conditions together by introducing a staging system for patients infected with HIV 1 ref name WHO
cite journal
author World Health Organisation
title Interim proposal for a WHO staging system for HIV infection and disease
journal WHO Wkly Epidem. Rec. year 1990 pages 221 228 volume 65 issue 29
id
ref. This was updated in September 2005. Most of these conditions are opportunistic infections that can be easily treated in healthy people.
: ''Stage I:'' HIV disease is asymptomatic and not categorized as AIDS
: ''Stage II:'' include minor mucocutaneous manifestations and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections
: ''Stage III:'' includes unexplained chronic diarrhea for longer than a month, severe bacterial infections and pulmonary tuberculosis or
: ''Stage IV'' includes toxoplasmosis of the brain, candidiasis of the esophagus, trachea, bronchi or lungs and Kaposi's sarcoma these diseases are used as indicators of AIDS.
CDC Classification System for HIV Infection
In the USA, the definition of AIDS is governed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In 1993, the CDC expanded their definition of AIDS to include healthy HIV positive people with a CD4 positive T cell count of less than 200 per l of blood. The majority of new AIDS cases in the United States are reported on the basis of a low T cell count in the presence of HIV infection ref name MMWR
cite web author CDC publisher CDC year 1992
url http: www.cdc.gov mmwr preview mmwrhtml 00018871.htm
title 1993 Revised Classification System for HIV Infection and Expanded Surveillance Case Definition for AIDS Among Adolescents and Adults
accessdate 2006 02 09
ref
HIV test
Approximately half of those infected with HIV don't know that they are infected until they are diagnosed with AIDS. HIV test kits are used to screen donor blood and blood products, and to diagnose HIV in individuals. Typical HIV tests, including the HIV enzyme immunoassay and the Western blot assay, detect HIV antibodies in serum, plasma, oral fluid, dried blood spot or urine of patients. Other tests to look for HIV antigens, HIV RNA, and HIV DNA are also commercially available and can be used to detect HIV infection prior to the development of detectable antibodies. However, these assays are not specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the diagnosis of HIV infection.
Symptoms and Complications
The symptoms of AIDS are primarily the result of conditions that do not normally develop in individuals with healthy immune systems. Most of these conditions are infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites that are normally controlled by the elements of the immune system that HIV damages. Opportunistic infections are common in people with AIDS ref name Holmes
cite journal
author Holmes, C. B., Losina, E., Walensky, R. P., Yazdanpanah, Y., Freedberg, K. A.
title Review of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 related opportunistic infections in sub Saharan Africa
journal Clin. Infect. Dis. year 2003 pages 656 662 volume 36 issue 5
id
ref. Nearly every organ system is affected. People with AIDS also have an increased risk of developing various cancers such as Kaposi sarcoma, cervical cancer and cancers of the immune system known as lymphomas.
Additionally, people with AIDS often have systemic symptoms of infection like fevers, sweats (particularly at night), swollen glands, chills, weakness, and weight loss ref name Guss
cite journal
author Guss, D. A.
title The acquired immune deficiency syndrome: an overview for the emergency physician, Part 1
journal J. Emerg. Med. year 1994 pages 375 384 volume 12 issue 3
id
refref name Guss2
cite journal
author Guss, D. A.
title The acquired immune deficiency syndrome: an overview for the emergency physician, Part 2
journal J. Emerg. Med. year 1994 pages 491 497 volume 12 issue 4
id
ref. After the diagnosis of AIDS is made, the current average survival time with antiretroviral therapy is estimated to be between 4 to 5 years ref name Schneider
cite journal
author Schneider, M. F., Gange, S. J., Williams, C. M., Anastos, K., Greenblatt, R. M., Kingsley, L., Detels, R., and Munoz, A.
title Patterns of the hazard of death after AIDS through the evolution of antiretroviral therapy: 1984 2004
journal AIDS year 2005 pages 2009 2018 volume 19 issue 17
id
ref, but because new treatments continue to be developed and because HIV continues to evolve resistance to treatments, estimates of survival time are likely to continue to change. Without antiretroviral therapy, progression to death normally occurs within a year ref name Morgan2
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B., Okongo, J. M., Lubega, R. and Whitworth, J. A.
title HIV 1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?
journal AIDS year 2002 pages 597 632 volume 16 issue 4
id
ref. Most patients die from opportunistic infections or malignancies associated with the progressive failure of the immune system ref name Lawn
cite journal
author Lawn, S. D.
title AIDS in Africa: the impact of coinfections on the pathogenesis of HIV 1 infection
journal J. Infect. Dis. year 2004 pages 1 12 volume 48 issue 1
id
ref.
The rate of clinical disease progression varies widely between individuals and has been shown to be affected by many factors such as host susceptibility ref name Clerici
cite journal
author Clerici, M., Balotta, C., Meroni, L., Ferrario, E., Riva, C., Trabattoni, D., Ridolfo, A., Villa, M., Shearer, G.M., Moroni, M. and Galli, M.
title Type 1 cytokine production and low prevalence of viral isolation correlate with long term non progression in HIV infection.
journal AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. year 1996 pages 1053 1061 volume 12 issue 11
id
refref name Morgan
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B. and Whitworth, J. A.
title Progression to symptomatic disease in people infected with HIV 1 in rural Uganda: prospective cohort study
journal BMJ year 2002 pages 193 196 volume 324 issue 7331
id
refref name Tang
cite journal
author Tang, J. and Kaslow, R. A.
title The impact of host genetics on HIV infection and disease progression in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy
journal AIDS year 2003 pages S51 S60 volume 17 issue Suppl 4
id
ref, health care and co infections ref name Morgan2
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B., Okongo, J. M., Lubega, R. and Whitworth, J. A.
title HIV 1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?
journal AIDS year 2002 pages 597 632 volume 16 issue 4
id
refref name Lawn
cite journal
author Lawn, S. D.
title AIDS in Africa: the impact of coinfections on the pathogenesis of HIV 1 infection
journal J. Infect. Dis. year 2004 pages 1 12 volume 48 issue 1
id
ref, and peculiarities of the viral strain ref name Campbell
cite journal
author Campbell, G. R., Pasquier, E., Watkins, J., Bourgarel Rey, V., Peyrot, V., Esquieu, D., Barbier, P., de Mareuil, J., Braguer, D., Kaleebu, P., Yirrell, D. L. and Loret E. P.
title The glutamine rich region of the HIV 1 Tat protein is involved in T cell apoptosis
journal J. Biol. Chem. year 2004 pages 48197 48204 volume 279 issue 46
id
refref name Campbell2
cite journal
author Campbell, G. R., Watkins, J. D., Esquieu, D., Pasquier, E., Loret, E. P. and Spector, S. A.
title The C terminus of HIV 1 Tat modulates the extent of CD178 mediated apoptosis of T cells
journal J. Biol. Chem. year 2005 pages 38376 39382 volume 280 issue 46
id
refref name Senkaali
cite journal
author Senkaali, D., Muwonge, R., Morgan, D., Yirrell, D., Whitworth, J. and Kaleebu, P.
title The relationship between HIV type 1 disease progression and V3 serotype in a rural Ugandan cohort
journal AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. year 2005 pages 932 937 volume 20 issue 9
id
ref. Also, the specific opportunistic infections that AIDS patients develop depends in part on the prevalence of these infections in the geographic area in which the patient lives.
The major pulmonary illnesses
'''''Pneumocystis jiroveci'' pneumonia''': ''Pneumocystis jiroveci'' pneumonia (originally known as ''Pneumocystis carinii'' pneumonia, often abbreviated PCP) is relatively rare in normal, immunocompetent people but common among HIV infected individuals. Before the advent of effective treatment and diagnosis in Western countries it was a common immediate cause of death. In developing countries, it is still one of the first indications of AIDS in untested individuals, although it does not generally occur unless the CD4 count is less than 200 per l ref name Feldman
cite journal
author Feldman, C.
title Pneumonia associated with HIV infection
journal Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. year 2005 pages 165 170 volume 18 issue 2
id
ref.
'''Tuberculosis''': Among infections associated with HIV, tuberculosis (TB) is unique in that it may be transmitted to immunocompetent persons via the respiratory route, is easily treatable once identified, may occur in early stage HIV disease, and is preventable with drug therapy. However, multi drug resistance is a potentially serious problem. Even though its incidence has declined because of the use of directly observed therapy and other improved practices in Western countries, this is not the case in developing countries where HIV is most prevalent. In early stage HIV infection (CD4 count 300 cells per l), TB typically presents as a pulmonary disease. In advanced HIV infection, TB may present atypically and extrapulmonary TB is common infecting bone marrow, bone, urinary and gastrointestinal tracts, liver, regional lymph nodes, and the central nervous system ref name Decker
cite journal
author Decker, C. F. and Lazarus, A.
title Tuberculosis and HIV infection. How to safely treat both disorders concurrently
journal Postgrad Med. year 2000 pages 57 60, 65 68 volume 108 issue 2
id
ref.
The major gastro intestinal illnesses
'''Esophagitis''': Esophagitis is an inflammation of the lining of the lower end of the esophagus (gullet or swallowing tube leading to the stomach). In HIV infected individuals, this could be due to fungus (candidiasis), virus (herpes simplex 1 or cytomegalovirus). In rare cases, it could be due to mycobacteria ref name Zaidi
cite journal
author Zaidi, S. A. and Cervia, J. S.
title Diagnosis and management of infectious esophagitis associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection
journal J. Int. Assoc. Physicians AIDS Care (Chic Ill) year 2002 pages 53 62 volume 1 issue 2
id
ref.
'''Unexplained chronic diarrhea''': In HIV infection, there are many possible causes of diarrhea, including common bacterial (''Salmonella'', ''Shigella'', ''Listeria'', ''Campylobacter'', or ''Escherichia coli'') and parasitic infections, and uncommon opportunistic infections such as cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis, ''Mycobacterium avium'' complex (MAC) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis. Diarrhea may follow a course of antibiotics (common for ''Clostridium difficile''). It may also be a side effect of several drugs used to treat HIV, or it may simply accompany HIV infection, particularly during primary HIV infection. In the later stages of HIV infection, diarrhea is thought to be a reflection of changes in the way the intestinal tract absorbs nutrients, and may be an important component of HIV related wasting ref name Guerrant
cite journal
author Guerrant, R. L., Hughes, J. M., Lima, N. L., Crane, J.
title Diarrhea in developed and developing countries: magnitude, special settings, and etiologies
journal Rev. Infect. Dis. year 1990 pages S41 S50 volume 12 issue Suppl 1
id
ref.
The major neurological illnesses
'''Toxoplasmosis''': Toxoplasmosis is a disease caused by the single celled parasite called ''Toxoplasma gondii''. ''T. gondii'' usually infects the brain causing toxoplasma encephalitis. It can also infect and cause disease in the eyes and lungs ref name Luft
cite journal
author Luft, B. J. and Chua, A.
title Central Nervous System Toxoplasmosis in HIV Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapy
journal Curr. Infect. Dis. Rep. year 2000 pages 358 362 volume 2 issue 4
id
ref.
'''Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy''': Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease, in which the myelin sheath covering the axons of nerve cells is gradually destroyed, impairing the transmission of nerve impulses. It is caused by a virus called JC virus which occurs in 70 of the population in latent form, causing disease only when the immune system has been severly weakened, as is the case for AIDS patients. It progresses rapidly, usually causing death within months of diagnosis ref name Sadler
cite journal
author Sadler, M. and Nelson, M. R.
title Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in HIV
journal Int. J. STD AIDS year 1997 pages 351 357 volume 8 issue 6
id
ref.
'''HIV associated dementia''': HIV 1 associated dementia (HAD) is a metabolic encephalopathy induced by HIV infection and fueled by immune activation of brain macrophages and microglia ref name Gray
cite journal
author Gray, F., Adle Biassette, H., Chr tien, F., Lorin de la Grandmaison, G., Force, G., Keohane, C.
title Neuropathology and neurodegeneration in human immunodeficiency virus infection. Pathogenesis of HIV induced lesions of the brain, correlations with HIV associated disorders and modifications according to treatments
journal Clin. Neuropathol. year 2001 pages 146 155 volume 20 issue 4
id
ref. These cells are actively infected with HIV and secrete neurotoxins of both host and viral origin. Specific neurologic impairments are manifested by cognitive, behavioral, and motor abnormalities that occur after years of HIV infection and is associated with low CD4 T cell levels and high plasma viral loads. Prevalence is between 10 20 in Western countries ref name Grant
cite book
author Grant, I., Sacktor, H., and McArthur, J.
year 2005
title The Neurology of AIDS
chapter HIV neurocognitive disorders
chapterurl http: www.hnrc.ucsd.edu publications pdf 2005grant1.pdf
editor H. E. Gendelman, I. Grant, I. Everall, S. A. Lipton, and S. Swindells. (ed.)
edition 2nd
pages 357 373
publisher Oxford University Press
location London, U.K.
id ISBN 0198526105
ref and has only been seen in 1 2 of India based infections ref name Satischandra
cite journal
author Satishchandra, P., Nalini, A., Gourie Devi, M., Khanna, N., Santosh, V., Ravi, V., Desai, A., Chandramuki, A., Jayakumar, P. N., and Shankar, S. K.
title Profile of neurologic disorders associated with HIV AIDS from Bangalore, south India (1989 96)
journal Indian J. Med. Res. year 2000 pages 14 23 volume 11 issue
id
refref name Wadia
cite journal
author Wadia, R. S., Pujari, S. N., Kothari, S., Udhar, M., Kulkarni, S., Bhagat, S., and Nanivadekar, A.
title Neurological manifestations of HIV disease
journal J. Assoc. Physicians India year 2001 pages 343 348 volume 49 issue
id
ref.
'''Cryptococcal meningitis''' This infection of the meninges (the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord) by the fungus ''Cryptococcus neoformans'' can cause fevers, headache, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. Patients may also develop seizures and confusion. If untreated, it can be lethal.
The major HIV associated malignancies
Patients with HIV infection have substantially increased incidence of several malignancies ref name Boshoff
cite journal
author Boshoff, C. and Weiss, R.
title AIDS related malignancies
journal Nat. Rev. Cancer year 2002 pages 373 382 volume 2 issue 5
id
refref name Yarchoan
cite journal
author Yarchoan, R., Tosatom G. and Littlem R. F.
title Therapy insight: AIDS related malignancies the influence of antiviral therapy on pathogenesis and management
journal Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol. year 2005 pages 406 415 volume 2 issue 8
id
ref. Several of these, Kaposi's sarcoma, high grade lymphoma, and cervical cancer confer a diagnosis of AIDS when they occur in an HIV infected person.
'''Kaposi's sarcoma:''' Kaposi's sarcoma is the most common tumor in HIV infected patients. The appearance of this tumor in young gay men in 1981 was one of the first signals of the AIDS epidemic. It is caused by a gammaherpesvirus called Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpes virus (KSHV). It often appears as purplish nodules on the skin, but other organs, especially the mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs can be affected.
'''High grade lymphoma:''' Several high grade B cell lymphomas have substantially increased incidence in HIV infected patients and often portend a poor prognosis. The most common AIDS defining lymphomas are Burkitt's lymphoma, Burkitt's like lymphoma, and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), including primary central nervous system lymphoma. Primary effusion lymphoma is less common. Many of these lymphomas are caused by either Epstein Barr virus (EBV) or KSHV.
'''Cervical cancer:''' Cervical cancer in HIV infected women is also considered AIDS defining. It is caused by human papillomavirus (HPV).
'''Other tumors:''' In addition to the AIDS defining tumors listed above, HIV infected patients are also at increased risk of certain other tumors, such as Hodgkin's disease and anal and rectal carcinomas. However, the incidence of many common tumors, such as breast cancer or colon cancer, are not increased in HIV infected patients. Most AIDS associated malignancies are caused by co infection of patients with an oncogenic DNA virus, especially Epstein Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV), and human papillomavirus (HPV). In areas where HAART is extensively used to treat AIDS, the incidence of many AIDS related malignancies has decreased, but at the same time malignancies overall have become the most common cause of death of HIV infected patients ref name Bonnet
cite journal
author Bonnet, F., Lewden, C., May, T., Heripret, L., Jougla, E., Bevilacqua, S., Costagliola, D., Salmon, D., Chene, G. and Morlat, P.
title Malignancy related causes of death in human immunodeficiency virus infected patients in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy
journal Cancer year 2004 pages 317 324 volume 101 issue 2
id
ref.
Other opportunistic infections
Patients with AIDS and severe immunosuppression often develop opportunistic infections that present with non specific symptoms, especially low grade fevers and weight loss. These include infection with ''Mycobacterium avium intracellulare'' and cytomegalovirus (CMV). CMV can also cause colitis, as described above, and CMV retinitis can cause blindness. Penicilliosis due to ''Penicillium marneffei'' is now the third most common opportunistic infection (after extrapulmonary tuberculosis and cryptococcosis) in HIV positive individuals within the endemic area of Southeast Asia ref name Skoulidis
cite journal
author Skoulidis, F., Morgan, M. S., and MacLeod, K. M.
title Penicillium marneffei: a pathogen on our doorstep?
journal J. R. Soc. Med. year 2004 pages 394 396 volume 97 issue 2
id
ref.
Transmission
Since the beginning of the epidemic, three main transmission routes of HIV have been identified:
'''Sexual route.''' The majority of HIV infections have been, and still are, acquired through unprotected sexual relations. Sexual transmission occurs when there is contact between sexual secretions of one partner with the rectal, genital or mouth mucous membranes of another.
'''Blood or blood product route.''' This transmission route is particularly important for intravenous drug users, hemophiliacs and recipients of blood transfusions and blood products. Health care workers (nurses, laboratory workers, doctors etc) are also concerned, although more rarely. Also concerned by this route are people who give and receive tattoos and piercings.
'''Mother to child route (vertical transmission).''' The transmission of the virus from the mother to the child can occur ''in utero'' during the last weeks of pregnancy and at childbirth. Breast feeding also presents a risk of infection for the baby. In the absence of treatment, the transmission rate between the mother and child was 20 . However, where treatment is available, combined with the availability of Cesarian section, this has been reduced to 1 .
HIV has been found in the saliva, tears and urine of infected individuals, but due to the low concentration of virus in these biological liquids, the risk is considered to be negligible.
Prevention
class "wikitable" align right border "1" cellpadding "2" cellspacing "0"
bgcolor " efefef"
! colspan 5 style "border right:0px " Estimated per act risk for acquisition of HIV, br by exposure route, assuming no condom use
bgcolor " efefef"
'''Exposure Route'''
'''Risk per 10,000 exposures br to an infected source'''
Blood Transfusion 9,000ref name Donegan
cite journal author Donegan, E., Stuart, M., Niland, J. C., Sacks, H. S., Azen, S. P., Dietrich, S. L., Faucett, C., Fletcher, M. A., Kleinman, S. H., Operskalski, E. A., et al. title Infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV 1) among recipients of antibody positive blood donations journal Ann. Intern. Med. year 1990 pages 733 739 volume 113 issue 10
id
ref
Needle sharing injection drug use 67 ref name Kaplan
cite journal author Kaplan, E. H. and Heimer, R. title HIV incidence among New Haven needle exchange participants: updated estimates from syringe tracking and testing data journal J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. Hum. Retrovirol. year 1995 pages 175 176 volume 10 issue 2
id
ref
Receptive anal intercourse 50 ref name ESG
cite journal author European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV title Comparison of female to male and male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples journal BMJ. year 1992 pages 809 813 volume 304 issue 6830 id
refref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
ref
Percutaneous needle stick 30 ref name Bell
cite journal author Bell, D. M. title Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in healthcare workers: an overview. journal Am. J. Med. year 1997 pages 9 15 volume 102 issue 5B id
ref
Receptive penile vaginal intercourse 10 ref name ESG
cite journal author European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV title Comparison of female to male and male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples journal BMJ. year 1992 pages 809 813 volume 304 issue 6830 id
refref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
refref name Leynaert
cite journal author Leynaert, B., Downs, A. M. and de Vincenzi, I. title Heterosexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus: variability of infectivity throughout the course of infection. European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV journal Am. J. Epidemiol. year 1998 pages 88 96 volume 148 issue 1 id
ref
Insertive anal intercourse 6.5 ref name ESG
cite journal author European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV title Comparison of female to male and male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples journal BMJ. year 1992 pages 809 813 volume 304 issue 6830 id
refref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
ref
Insertive penile vaginal intercourse 5 ref name ESG
cite journal author European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV title Comparison of female to male and male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples journal BMJ. year 1992 pages 809 813 volume 304 issue 6830 id
refref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
ref
Receptive oral intercourse 1 ref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
ref
Insertive oral intercourse 0.5 ref name Varghese
cite journal author Varghese, B., Maher, J. E., Peterman, T. A., Branson, B. M. and Steketee, R. W. title Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use journal Sex. Transm. Dis. year 2002 pages 38 43 volume 29 issue 1 id
ref
The diverse transmission routes of HIV are well known and established. Also well known is how to prevent transmission of HIV. However, recent epidemiological and behavioral studies in Europe and North America have suggested that a substantial minority of young people continue to engage in high risk practices and that despite HIV AIDS knowledge, young people underestimate their own risk of becoming infected with HIV ref name Dias
cite journal
author Dias, S. F., Matos, M. G. and Goncalves, A. C.
title Preventing HIV transmission in adolescents: an analysis of the Portuguese data from the Health Behaviour School aged Children study and focus groups
journal Eur. J. Public Health year 2005 pages 300 304 volume 15 issue 3
id
ref. However, transmission of HIV between intravenous drug users has clearly decreased, and HIV transmission by blood transfusion has become quite rare in developed countries.
Prevention of sexual transmission of HIV
Underlying science
Unprotected receptive sexual acts are at more risk than unprotected insertive sexual acts, with the risk for transmitting HIV from an infected partner to an uninfected partner through unprotected insertive anal intercourse greater than the risk for transmission through vaginal intercourse or oral sex. Oral sex is not without its risks as it has been established that HIV can be transmitted through both insertive and receptive oral sex ref name Rothenberg
cite journal author Rothenberg, R. B., Scarlett, M., del Rio, C., Reznik, D. and O'Daniels, C.
title Oral transmission of HIV journal AIDS year 1998 pages 2095 2105 volume 12 issue 16
id
ref.
Sexually transmitted infections (STI) increase the risk of HIV transmission and infection because they cause the disruption of the normal epithelial barrier by genital ulceration and or microulceration and by accumulation of pools of HIV susceptible or HIV infected cells (lymphocytes and macrophages) in semen and vaginal secretions. Epidemiological studies from sub Saharan Africa, Europe and North America have suggested that there is approximately a four times greater risk of becoming HIV infected in the presence of a genital ulcer such as caused by syphilis and or chancroid and a significant though lesser increased risk in the presence of STIs such as gonorrhoea, chlamydial infection and trichomoniasis which cause local accumulations of lymphocytes and macrophages ref name Laga
cite journal
author Laga, M., Nzila, N., Goeman, J.
title The interrelationship of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV infection: implications for the control of both epidemics in Africa
journal AIDS year 1991 pages S55 S63 volume 5 issue Suppl 1
id
ref.
Transmission of HIV depends on the infectiousness of the index case and the susceptibility of the uninfected partner. Infectivity seems to vary during the course of illness and is not constant between individuals. An undetectable plasma viral load does not mean that you have a low viral load in the seminal liquid or genital secretions. Each 10 fold increment of seminal HIV RNA is associated with an 81 increased rate of HIV transmission ref name Laga
cite journal
author Laga, M., Nzila, N., Goeman, J.
title The interrelationship of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV infection: implications for the control of both epidemics in Africa
journal AIDS year 1991 pages S55 S63 volume 5 issue Suppl 1
id
refref name Tovanabutra
cite journal
author Tovanabutra, S., Robison, V., Wongtrakul, J., Sennum, S., Suriyanon, V., Kingkeow, D., Kawichai, S., Tanan, P., Duerr, A. and Nelson, K. E.
title Male viral load and heterosexual transmission of HIV 1 subtype E in northern Thailand
journal J. Acquir. Immune. Defic. Syndr. year 2002 pages 275 283 volume 29 issue 3
id
ref. Women are more susceptible to HIV 1 infection due to hormonal changes, vaginal microbial ecology and physiology, and a higher prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases ref name Sagar
cite journal
author Sagar, M., Lavreys, L., Baeten, J. M., Richardson, B. A., Mandaliya, K., Ndinya Achola, J. O., Kreiss, J. K., and Overbaugh, J.
title Identification of modifiable factors that affect the genetic diversity of the transmitted HIV 1 population
journal AIDS year 2004 pages 615 619 volume 18 issue 4
id
refref name Lavreys
cite journal
author Lavreys, L., Baeten, J. M., Martin, H. L. Jr., Overbaugh, J., Mandaliya, K., Ndinya Achola, J., and Kreiss, J. K.
title Hormonal contraception and risk of HIV 1 acquisition: results of a 10 year prospective study
journal AIDS year 2004 pages 695 697 volume 18 issue 4
id
ref. Also, people who are infected with HIV can still be infected by other, more virulent strains.
Prevention strategies
During a sexual act, only condoms, be they male or female, can reduce the chances of infection with HIV and other STIs and the chances of becoming pregnant. They must be used during all penetrative sexual intercourse with a partner who is HIV positive or whose status is unknown ref name Cayley
cite journal
author Cayley, W. E. Jr.
title Effectiveness of condoms in reducing heterosexual transmission of HIV
journal Am. Fam. Physician year 2004 pages 1268 1269 volume 70 issue 7
id
ref. The effective use of condoms and screening of blood transfusion in North America, Western and Central Europe is credited with the low rates of AIDS in these regions.
Promoting condom use, however, has often proved controversial and difficult. Many religious groups, most visibly the Roman Catholic Church, have opposed the use of condoms on religious grounds, and have sometimes seen condom promotion as an affront to the promotion of marriage, monogamy and sexual morality. Other religious groups have argued that preventing HIV infection is a moral task in itself and that condoms are therefore acceptable or even praiseworthy from a religious point of view.
''The male latex condom'' is the single most efficient available technology to reduce the sexual transmission of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. In order to be effective, they must be used correctly during each sexual act. Lubricants containing oil, such as petroleum jelly, or butter, must not be used as they weaken latex condoms and make them porous. If necessary, lubricants made from water are recommended. However, it is not recommended to use a lubricant for fellatio. Also, condoms have standards and expiration dates. It is essential to check the expiration date and if it conforms to European (EC 600) or American (D3492) standards before use.
''The female condom'' is an alternative to the male condom and is made from polyurethane, which allows it to be used in the presence of oil based lubricants. They are larger than male condoms and have a stiffened ring shaped opening, and are designed to be inserted into the vagina. The female condom also contains an inner ring which keeps the condom in place inside the vagina inserting the female condom requires squeezing this ring.
With consistent and correct use of condoms, there is a very low risk of HIV infection. Studies on couples where one partner is infected show that with consistent condom use, HIV infection rates for the uninfected partner are below 1 per year ref name WHOCondoms
cite web
author WHO publisher year 2003
url http: www.wpro.who.int media centre fact sheets fs 200308 Condoms.htm
title Condom Facts and Figures
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
Governmental programs
The U.S. government and U.S. health organizations both endorse the '''''ABC Approach''''' to lower the risk of acquiring AIDS during sex:
: '''A'''bstinence or delay of sexual activity, especially for youth,
: '''B'''eing faithful, especially for those in committed relationships,
: '''C'''ondom use, for those who engage in risky behavior.
This approach has been very successful in Uganda, where HIV prevalence has decreased from 15 to 5 . However, the ABC approach is far from all that Uganda has done, as "''Uganda has pioneered approaches towards reducing stigma, bringing discussion of sexual behavior out into the open, involving HIV infected people in public education, persuading individuals and couples to be tested and counseled, improving the status of women, involving religious organizations, enlisting traditional healers, and much more.''" (Edward Green, Harvard medical anthropologist). Also, it must be noted that there is no conclusive proof that abstinence only programs have been successful in any country in the world in reducing HIV transmission. This is why condom use is heavily co promoted. There is also considerable overlap with the '''''CNN Approach'''''. This is:
: '''C'''ondom use, for those who engage in risky behavior.
: '''N'''eedles, use clean ones
: '''N'''egotiating skills negotiating safer sex with a partner and empowering women to make smart choices
The '''ABC approach''' has been criticized, because a faithful partner of an unfaithful partner is at risk of AIDS ref name EconomistABC
cite web
author The Economist publisher year 2005
url http: www.economist.com opinion displayStory.cfm?story id 4223619
title Too much morality, too little sense
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. Many think that the combination of the CNN approach with the ABC approach will be the optimum prevention platform.
Circumcision
Current research is clarifying the relationship between male circumcision and HIV in differing social and cultural contexts. UNAIDS believes that it is premature to recommend male circumcision services as part of HIV prevention programmes ref name WHOcircumcision
cite web
author WHO publisher year 2005
url http: www.who.int mediacentre news releases 2005 pr32 en
title UNAIDS statement on South African trial findings regarding male circumcision and HIV
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. Moreover, South African medical experts are concerned that the repeated use of unsterilised blades in the ritual circumcision of adolescent boys may be spreading HIV ref name Kaisercircum
cite web
author Various publisher Kaisernetwork.org year 2005
url http: www.kaisernetwork.org daily reports rep index.cfm?DR ID 31199
title Repeated Use of Unsterilized Blades in Ritual Circumcision Might Contribute to HIV Spread in S. Africa, Doctors Say
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
Prevention of blood or blood product route of HIV transmission
Underlying science
Sharing and reusing syringes contaminated with HIV infected blood represents a major risk for infection with not only HIV but also hepatitis B and hepatitis C. In the United States a third of all new HIV infections can be traced to needle sharing and almost 50 of long term addicts have hepatitis C. The risk of being infected with HIV from a single prick with a needle that has been used on an HIV infected person though is thought to be about 1 in 150 (see table above). Post exposure prophylaxis with anti HIV drugs can further reduce that small risk ref name Fan
cite book
author Fan, H. year 2005
title AIDS: science and society chapter chapterurl
editor Fan, H., Conner, R. F. and Villarreal, L. P. eds
edition 4th pages
publisher Jones and Bartlett Publishers
location Boston, MA
id ISBN 076370086X
ref. Universal precautions are frequently not followed in both sub Saharan Africa and much of Asia because of both a shortage of supplies and inadequate training. The WHO estimates that approximately 2.5 of all HIV infections in sub Saharan Africa are transmitted through unsafe healthcare injections ref name WHOJapan
cite web
author WHO publisher year 2003
url http: 64.233.179.104 search?q cache:adH68 6JGG8J:tokyo.usembassy.gov e p tp 20030317a3.html site:tokyo.usembassy.gov HIV healthcare injection hl en gl us ct clnk cd 1
title WHO, UNAIDS Reaffirm HIV as a Sexually Transmitted Disease
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. Because of this, the United Nations General Assembly, supported by universal medical opinion on the matter, has urged the nations of the world to implement universal precautions to prevent HIV transmission in health care settings ref name PHR
cite web
author Physicians for Human Rights publisher Partners in Health year 2003
url http: www.phrusa.org campaigns aids who 031303.html
title HIV Transmission in the Medical Setting: A White Paper by Physicians for Human Rights accessdate 2006 03 01
refref name UNGA
cite web
author United Nations General Assembly publisher year 2001
url http: www.un.org ga aids coverage FinalDeclarationHIVAIDS.html
title Declaration of Commitment on HIV AIDS ''Global Crisis Global Action''
accessdate 2006 03 01
ref.
Prevention strategies
In countries where improved donor selection and antibody tests have been introduced, the risk of transmitting HIV infection to blood transfusion recipients is extremely low. But according to the WHO, the overwhelming majority of the world's population does not have access to safe blood and "between 5 and 10 of HIV infections worldwide are transmitted through the transfusion of infected blood and blood products" ref name WHO070401
cite web
author WHO publisher year 2001
url http: www.who.int inf pr 2000 en pr2000 25.html
title Blood safety....for too few
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
Medical workers who follow universal precautions or body substance isolation such as wearing latex gloves when giving injections and washing the hands frequently can help prevent infection of HIV.
All AIDS prevention organizations advise drug users not to share needles and other material required to prepare and take drugs (including syringes, cotton balls, the spoons, water for diluting the drug, straws, crack pipes etc). It is important that people use new or properly sterilized needles for each injection. Information on cleaning needles using bleach is available from health care and addiction professionals and from needle exchanges. In the United States and some other countries, clean needles are available free in some cities, at needle exchanges or safe injection sites. Additionally, many states within the United States and some other nations have decriminalized needle possession and made it possible to buy injection equipment from pharmacists without a prescription.
Mother to child transmission
Underlying science
There is a 15 30 risk of transmission of HIV from mother to child during pregnancy, labour and delivery ref name Orendi
cite journal
author Orendi, J. M., Boer, K., van Loon, A. M., Borleffs, J. C., van Oppen, A. C., Boucher, C. A.
title Vertical HIV I transmission. I. Risk and prevention in pregnancy
journal Ned. Tijdschr. Geneeskd year 1998 pages 2720 2724 volume 142 issue 50
id
ref. In developed countries the risk can of transmission of HIV from mother to child can be as low as 0 5 . A number of factors influence the risk of infection, particularly the viral load of the mother at birth (the higher the load, the higher the risk). Breastfeeding increases the risk of transmission by 10 15 . This risk depends on clinical factors and may vary according to the pattern and duration of breastfeeding.
Prevention strategies
Studies have shown that antiretroviral drugs, cesarean delivery and formula feeding reduce the chance of transmission of HIV from mother to child ref name Sperling
cite journal
author Sperling, R. S., Shapirom D. E., Coombsm R. W., Todd, J. A., Herman, S. A., McSherry, G. D., O'Sullivan, M. J., Van Dyke, R. B., Jimenez, E., Rouzioux, C., Flynn, P. M. and Sullivan, J. L.
title Maternal viral load, zidovudine treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from mother to infant
journal N. Engl. J. Med. year 1996 pages 1621 1629 volume 335 issue 22
id
ref. When replacement feeding is acceptable, feasible, affordable, sustainable and safe, HIV infected mothers are recommended to avoid breast feeding their infant. Otherwise, exclusive breastfeeding is recommended during the first months of life and should be discontinued as soon as possible ref name UNAIDS
cite web
author UNAIDS publisher year 2005
url http: www.unaids.org Epi2005 doc EPIupdate2005 pdf en epi update2005 en.pdf
title AIDS epidemic update, 2005
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
Treatment
There is currently no cure for HIV or AIDS. Infection with HIV usually leads to AIDS and ultimately death. However, in western countries, most patients survive many years following diagnosis because of the availability of the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART)ref name Schneider
cite journal
author Schneider, M. F., Gange, S. J., Williams, C. M., Anastos, K., Greenblatt, R. M., Kingsley, L., Detels, R., and Munoz, A.
title Patterns of the hazard of death after AIDS through the evolution of antiretroviral therapy: 1984 2004
journal AIDS year 2005 pages 2009 2018 volume 19 issue 17
id
ref. In the absence of HAART, progression from HIV infection to AIDS occurs at a median of between nine to ten years and the median survival time after developing AIDS is only 9.2 monthsref name Morgan2
cite journal
author Morgan, D., Mahe, C., Mayanja, B., Okongo, J. M., Lubega, R. and Whitworth, J. A.
title HIV 1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?
journal AIDS year 2002 pages 597 632 volume 16 issue 4 id
ref. HAART dramatically increases the time from diagnosis to death, and treatment research continues.
Current optimal HAART options consist of combinations (or "cocktails") consisting of at least three drugs belonging to at least two types, or "classes," of anti retroviral agents. Typical regimens consist of two nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) plus either a protease inhibitor or a non nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI). This treatment is frequently referred to as HAART (highly active anti retroviral therapy) ref name DhhsHivTreatment
cite web
author Department of Health and Human Services publisher
year January, 2005
url http: www.hab.hrsa.gov tools HIVpocketguide05 PktGARTtables.htm
title A Pocket Guide to Adult HIV AIDS Treatment January 2005 edition
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. Anti retroviral treatments, along with medications intended to prevent AIDS related opportunistic infections, have played a part in delaying complications associated with AIDS, reducing the symptoms of HIV infection, and extending patients' life spans. Over the past decade the success of these treatments in prolonging and improving the quality of life for people with AIDS has improved dramatically ref name Wood
cite journal
author Wood, E., Hogg, R. S., Yip, B., Harrigan, P. R., O'Shaughnessy, M. V. and Montaner, J. S.
title Is there a baseline CD4 cell count that precludes a survival response to modern antiretroviral therapy?
journal AIDS year 2003 pages 711 720 volume 17 issue 5
id
refref name Chene
cite journal
author Chene, G., Sterne, J. A., May, M., Costagliola, D., Ledergerber, B., Phillips, A. N., Dabis, F., Lundgren, J., D'Arminio Monforte, A., de Wolf, F., Hogg, R., Reiss, P., Justice, A., Leport, C., Staszewski, S., Gill, J., Fatkenheuer, G., Egger, M. E. and the Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration.
title Prognostic importance of initial response in HIV 1 infected patients starting potent antiretroviral therapy: analysis of prospective studies
journal Lancet year 2003 pages 679 686 volume 362 issue 9385
id
ref.
Because HIV disease progression in children is more rapid than in adults, and laboratory parameters are less predictive of risk for disease progression, particularly for young infants, treatment recommendations from the DHHS have been more aggressive in children than in adults, the current guidelines were published November 3 2005 ref name 2005dhhsHivChildren
cite web
author Department of Health and Human Services Working Group on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical Management of HIV Infected Children
publisher year November 3, 2005
url http: www.aidsinfo.nih.gov ContentFiles PediatricGuidelines PDA.pdf
title Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in Pediatric HIV Infection
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
The DHHS also recommends that doctors should assess the viral load, rapidity in CD4 decline, and patient readiness while deciding when to recommend initiating treatment ref name 2005DhhsHivTreatment
cite web
author Department of Health and Human Services Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection
publisher year October 6, 2005
url http: aidsinfo.nih.gov ContentFiles AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf
title Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV 1 Infected Adults and Adolescents
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
There are several concerns about antiretroviral regimens. The drugs can have serious side effectsref name Saitoh
cite journal
author Saitoh, A., Hull, A. D., Franklin, P. and Spector, S. A.
title Myelomeningocele in an infant with intrauterine exposure to efavirenz
journal J. Perinatol. year 2005 pages 555 556 volume 25 issue 8
id
ref. Regimens can be complicated, requiring patients to take several pills at various times during the day, although treatment regimens have been greatly simplified in recent years. If patients miss doses, drug resistance can develop ref name Dybul
cite journal
author Dybul, M., Fauci, A. S., Bartlett, J. G., Kaplan, J. E., Pau, A. K. Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV.
title Guidelines for using antiretroviral agents among HIV infected adults and adolescents
journal Ann. Intern. Med. year 2002 pages 381 433 volume 137 issue 5 Pt 2
id
ref. Also, anti retroviral drugs are costly, and the majority of the world's infected individuals do not have access to medications and treatments for HIV and AIDS.
Research to improve current treatments includes decreasing side effects of current drugs, further simplifying drug regimens to improve adherence, and determining the best sequence of regimens to manage drug resistance.
A number of studies have shown that measures to prevent opportunistic infections can be beneficial when treating patients with HIV infection or AIDS. Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is advised for patients who are not infected with these viruses and are at risk of getting infected. In addition, AIDS patients should receive vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae and should receive yearly vaccination against influenza virus. Patients with substantial immunosuppression are generally advised to receive prophylactic therapy for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP), and many patients may benefit from prophylactic therapy for toxoplasmosis and Cryptococcus meningitis.
Alternative medicine
Ever since AIDS entered the public consciousness, various forms of alternative medicine have been used to try to treat symptoms or to try to affect the course of the disease itself. In the first decade of the epidemic when no useful conventional treatment was available, a large number of people with AIDS experimented with alternative therapies. The definition of "alternative therapies" in AIDS has changed since that time. During that time, the phrase often referred to community driven treatments, not being tested by government or pharmaceutical company research, that some hoped would directly suppress the virus or stimulate immunity against it. These kinds of approaches have become less common over time as AIDS drugs have become more effective.
The phrase then and now also refers to other approaches that people hoped would improve their symptoms or their quality of life for instance, massage, herbal and flower remedies and acupuncture when used with conventional treatment, many now refer to these as "complementary" approaches. None of these treatments have been proven in controlled trials to have any effect in treating HIV or AIDS directly. However, some may improve feelings of well being in people who believe in their value. Additionally, people with AIDS, like people with other illnesses such as cancer, also sometimes use marijuana to treat pain, combat nausea and stimulate appetite.
Epidemiology
UNAIDS and the WHO estimate that AIDS has killed more than 25 million people since it was first recognized in 1981, making it one of the most destructive epidemics in recorded history. Despite recent, improved access to antiretroviral treatment and care in many regions of the world, the AIDS epidemic claimed an estimated 3.1 million (between 2.8 and 3.6 million) lives in 2005 of which more than half a million (570,000) were children ref name UNAIDS
cite web
author UNAIDS publisher year 2005
url http: www.unaids.org Epi2005 doc EPIupdate2005 pdf en epi update2005 en.pdf
title AIDS epidemic update, 2005
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref.
Globally, between 36.7 and 45.3 million people are currently living with HIV ref name UNAIDS
cite web
author UNAIDS publisher year 2005
url http: www.unaids.org Epi2005 doc EPIupdate2005 pdf en epi update2005 en.pdf
title AIDS epidemic update, 2005
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. In 2005, between 4.3 and 6.6 million people were newly infected and between 2.8 and 3.6 million people with AIDS died, an increase from 2004 and the highest number since 1981.
Sub Saharan Africa remains by far the worst affected region, with an estimated 23.8 to 28.9 million people currently living with HIV. More than 60 of all people living with HIV are in sub Saharan Africa, as are more than three quarters (76 ) of all women living with HIV ref name UNAIDS
cite web
author UNAIDS publisher year 2005
url http: www.unaids.org Epi2005 doc EPIupdate2005 pdf en epi update2005 en.pdf
title AIDS epidemic update, 2005
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. South South East Asia are second most affected with 15 . AIDS accounts for the deaths of 500,000 children.
The latest evaluation report of the World Bank's Operations Evaluation Department assesses the development effectiveness of the World Bank's country level HIV AIDS assistance defined as policy dialogue, analytic work, and lending with the explicit objective of reducing the scope or impact of the AIDS epidemic ref name Worldbank
cite web
author World Bank publisher year 2005
url http: www.worldbank.org oed aids main report.html
title Evaluating the World Bank's Assistance for Fighting the HIV AIDS Epidemic
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. This is the first comprehensive evaluation of the World Bank's HIV AIDS support to countries, from the beginning of the epidemic through mid 2004. Because the Bank's assistance is for implementation of government programs by government, it provides important insights on how national AIDS programs can be made more effective.
The development of HAART as effective therapy for HIV infection and AIDS has substantially reduced the death rate from this disease in those areas where it is widely available. This has created the misperception that the disease has gone away. In fact, as the life expectancy of persons with AIDS has increased in countries where HAART is widely used, the number of persons living with AIDS has increased substantially. In the United States, for example, the number of persons with AIDS increased from about 35,000 in 1988 to over 220,000 in 1996 ref name CDC1996
cite journal
author CDC
title U.S. HIV and AIDS cases reported through December 1996
journal HIV AIDS Surveillance Report year 1996 pages 1 40 volume 8 issue 2 url http: www.cdc.gov hiv stats hivsur82.pdf
ref.
Origin of HIV AIDS
The official date for the beginning of the AIDS epidemic is marked as June 18, 1981, when the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention reported a cluster of ''Pneumocystis carinii'' pneumonia (now classified as Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia) in five gay men in Los Angeles ref name MMWR2
cite web
author CDC publisher CDC year 1981
url http: www.cdc.gov mmwr preview mmwrhtml june 5.htm
title Pneumocystis Pneumonia Los Angeles
accessdate 2006 01 17
ref. Originally dubbed GRID, or Gay Related Immune Deficiency, health authorities soon realized that nearly half of the people identified with the syndrome were not gay. In 1982, the CDC introduced the term AIDS to describe the newly recognized syndrome.
Three of the earliest known instances of HIV infection are as follows:
A plasma sample taken in 1959 from an adult male living in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo ref name Zhu
cite journal
author Zhu, T., Korber, B. T., Nahmias, A. J., Hooper, E., Sharp, P. M. and Ho, D. D. title An African HIV 1 Sequence from 1959 and Implications for the Origin of the Epidemic
journal Nature year 1998 pages 594 597 volume 391 issue 6667
id
ref.
HIV found in tissue samples from an American teenager who died in St. Louis in 1969.
HIV found in tissue samples from a Norwegian sailor who died around 1976.
Two species of HIV infect humans: HIV 1 and HIV 2. HIV 1 is more virulent and more easily transmitted. HIV 1 is the source of the majority of HIV infections throughout the world, while HIV 2 is less easily transmitted and is largely confined to West Africa ref name Reeves
cite journal
author Reeves, J. D. and Doms, R. W
title Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 2
journal J. Gen. Virol. year 2002 pages 1253 1265 volume 83 issue Pt 6
id
ref. Both HIV 1 and HIV 2 are of primate origin. The origin of HIV 1 is the Central Common Chimpanzee (''Pan troglodytes troglodytes''). The origin of HIV 2 has been established to be the Sooty Mangabey (''Cercocebus atys''), an Old World monkey of Guinea Bissau, Gabon, and Cameroon.
One currently controversial possibility for the origin of HIV AIDS was discussed in a 1992 Rolling Stone magazine article by freelance journalist Tom Curtis. He put forward the theory that AIDS was inadvertantly caused in the late 1950's in the Belgian Congo by Hilary Koprowski's research into a polio vaccine ref name Curtis
cite journal
author Curtis, T.
title The origin of AIDS
journal Rolling Stone year 1992 pages 54 59, 61, 106, 108 volume issue 626 url http: www.uow.edu.au arts sts bmartin dissent documents AIDS Curtis92.html
ref. Although subsequently retracted due to libel issues surrounding its claims, the Rolling Stone article motivated another freelance journalist, Edward Hooper, to probe more deeply into this subject. Hooper's research resulted in his publishing a 1999 book, The River, in which he alleged that an experimental oral polio vaccine prepared using chimpanzee kidney tissue was the route through which SIV crossed into humans to become HIV, thus starting the
human AIDS pandemicref name Hooper
cite book
author Hooper, E.
year 1999
title The River : A Journey to the Source of HIV and AIDS
edition 1st
pages 1 1070
publisher Little Brown Co
location Boston, MA
id ISBN 0316372617
ref.
Alternative theories
A minority of scientists and activists question the connection between HIV and AIDS ref name Duesberg
cite journal
author Duesberg, P. H.
title HIV is not the cause of AIDS
journal Science year 1988 pages 514, 517 volume 241 issue 4865
id
ref, or the existence of HIV ref name Papadopulos
cite journal
author Papadopulos Eleopulos, E., Turner, V. F., Papadimitriou, J., Page, B., Causer, D., Alfonso, H., Mhlongo, S., Miller, T., Maniotis, A. and Fiala, C.
title A critique of the Montagnier evidence for the HIV AIDS hypothesis
journal Med Hypotheses year 2004 pages 597 601 volume 63 issue 4
id
ref, or the validity of current testing methods. These claims are met with resistance by, and often evoke frustration and hostility from, most of the scientific community, who accuse the dissidents of ignoring evidence in favor of HIV's role in AIDS, and irresponsibly posing a dangerous threat to public health by their continued activities ref name Cohen
cite journal
author Cohen, J.
title The Duesberg phenomenon
journal Science year 1994 pages 1642 1644 volume 266 issue 5191
id
url http: www.sciencemag.org feature data cohen 266 5191 1642a.pdf
ref. Dissidents assert that the current mainstream approach to AIDS, based on HIV causation, has resulted in inaccurate diagnoses, psychological terror, toxic treatments, and a squandering of public funds. The debate and controversy regarding this issue from the early 1980s to the present has provoked heated emotions and passions from both sides.
References
div style "font size:85 "
references
div
External links
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV AIDS
latest research and other resources on HIV and AIDS in developing countries
the world's leading independent association of HIV AIDS professionals
AIDS Education Global Information System
World AIDS Day 1 December Show your support
Evaluating the World Bank's Assistance for Fighting the HIV AIDS Epidemic
: Comprehensive HIV AIDS Information
AIDSinfo 2002
: Comprehensive lessons on HIV AIDS and their treatments
US Center for Disease Control (2005)
Distributed computing project against AIDS
Health Action AIDS (2003)
NIAID NIH 2003
NIAID NIH 2003
NIAID NIH 2004
NIH 2001
The Body 2005
Origin of Aids Video
Journal Watch 2005
UNAIDS Scenarios to 2025
AIDS dissident websites
The Body's list of resources criticizing the "AIDS reappraisal" movement
Gestalt Therapy and AIDS
Documentation on the oral polio vaccine (OPV) theory of AIDS origin
AIDS News
Nov 2005 Progress in HIV vaccine research
Category:HIV AIDS
Category:Immune system disorders
Category:Infectious diseases
Category:Pandemics
Category:Sexually transmitted diseases
Category:Virology
af:VIGS
als:AIDS
ar:
bg:
bm:Sida
be:
bs:Sida
ca:SIDA
cs:AIDS
da:Aids
de:Aids
es:SIDA
eo:Aidoso
eu:HIES
fa:
fr:Syndrome d'immunod ficience acquise
ko:
hi:
hr:SIDA
he:
sw:Ukimwi
ku:AIDS
lv:AIDS
lt:AIDS
ln:Sida
hu:AIDS
ms:AIDS
nl:Aids
ja:
no:AIDS
nn:HIV AIDS
pl:Zesp nabytego niedoboru odporno ci
ps:
pt:S ndrome da imuno defici ncia adquirida
qu:SIDA
ru:
simple:AIDS
sk:AIDS
sl:AIDS
sr:
fi:AIDS
sv:Aids
ta:
tt:A DS
th:
vi:AIDS
tr:AIDS
uk:
zh:
Infobox band
band name ABBA
image
caption ''Clockwise from top: Andersson, Ulvaeus, Lyngstad, F ltskog''
origin Stockholm, Sweden
status
years active 1972 1982
music genre Rockbr Europopbr Popbr Disco
record label Polar Musicbr Atlantic Recordsbr Epic Recordsbr Universal Musicbr Polydor Records
current members
past members Benny Anderssonbr Agnetha F ltskogbr Anni Frid "Frida" Lyngstadbr Bj rn Ulvaeus
'''ABBA''' (1972 1983) was a Swedish pop music group. They remain the most successful Swedish music act and were one of the most popular groups in the world. The group dominated charts worldwide during the mid to late 1970s and early 1980s, selling many hit singles and albums. Estimates of ABBA's total worldwide sales vary from 300 to 400 million (there seems to be no reliable source for this information) which could make them the second most successful band of all time after The Beatles. They were the first act from the European mainland to become a regular fixture in British, American and Australian charts, and their success subsequently opened the doors for many other European acts. Their lasting legacy is the legitimising of the Swedish music industry as a mainstream player.
ABBA was formed around 1972 with Bj rn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Agnetha F ltskog, and Anni Frid Lyngstad (nicknamed "Frida"). They became widely known after winning the 1974 Eurovision Song Contest with "Waterloo". The group consisted of two couples, Bj rn and Agnetha along with Benny and Frida. ABBA collectively decided to take a break at the beginning of 1983. They have yet to record together again in the studio.
''ABBA'' is an acronym formed from the first letters of each group member's name. It is usually written '''ABBA''' but is sometimes written as a word, '''Abba'''. The first ''B'' in the logo version of the name was reversed on the band's promotional material from 1976 onwards.
History
Before ABBA
Benny Andersson was a member of the Swedish rock pop band Hep Stars who were very popular in Sweden during the 1960s. The band was modeled after various US and UK groups such as Herman's Hermits, The Who and The Rolling Stones. The Hep Stars had a huge following, especially among teenage girls. Meanwhile Bj rn Ulvaeus was fronting a skiffle group called the Hootenanny Singers whose sound was softer and more easy listening than the Hep Stars. The singers crossed paths sometimes and they decided to write songs together. One of these, "Isn't It Easy To Say," became a hit for the Hep Stars and Bj rn sometimes guested with the band on tour. It was even suggested that the two bands merge but this never happened. Stig Anderson, manager of the Hootenanny Singers and founder of Polar Music, saw more potential in Benny and Bj rn working together and encouraged them to write more songs and create an album which was eventually called ''Lycka'' ("Happiness") when released on the Polar label.
Agnetha F ltskog was ABBA's youngest member and a pop phenomenon in her own right who wrote and performed Swedish hits while in her teens and had also played Mary Magdalene in the Swedish production of ''Jesus Christ Superstar''. Agnetha was noted by critics and songwriters as an accomplished composer but she considered it hard work, writing and performing light pop songs in the Schlager style, recording covers of hit songs and touring Swedish folkparks, the main "live circuit" at that time. Inevitably she bumped into the Hootenanny Singers on their folkpark tours, meeting and eventually falling in love with Bj rn. Their marriage in 1971 was the Swedish celebrity wedding of the year and drew much publicity.
Housewife Anni Frid "Frida" Lyngstad was a part time cabaret singer who decided to enter a talent competition and won. Sweden was changing over from driving on the left side of the road to the right and a series of spectacular shows was being aired to encourage people to stay off the roads on the night of the switchover. Invited to appear on TV that evening with her winning song, Frida's musical career took off. She met Benny Andersson on the wonted folkpark tour. They became lovers and Benny invited Anni Frid to sing backing vocals with Agnetha on the ''Lycka'' album. The two women were uncredited for this work.
Early years
By the early 1970s, although Bj rn and Agnetha were married, they pursued their own separate musical careers. However Stig was ambitious and determined to break into the mainstream international market, not something that Swedish acts were usually known for, though previously achieved by Swedish instrumental guitar group The Spotnicks (their best known hit was "Orange Blossom Special"). As a result he encouraged Bj rn and Benny to write a song for the 1972 Eurovision Song Contest and it was performed by Lena Anderson. "Say It With a Song" won third in the contest selection rounds but was a huge hit in several countries, convincing Stig he was on the right track.
Bj rn and Benny persevered with their songwriting and experimented with new sounds and vocal arrangements which brought some success in Japan. One of the songs they came up with was "People Need Love," featuring guest vocals by the girls who were now given much greater prominence than previously. Everyone involved felt enthusiastic about the new sound and Stig released it as a single, credited to ''Bj rn Benny, Agnetha Anni Frid''. The record reached number 17 in the Swedish charts, enough to convince them they were on to something.
version of the album ''Ring Ring''.
The following year they decided to have another crack at Eurovision, this time with the song "Ring Ring." The studio work was handled by Michael B. Tretow who experimented with a Phil Spector like "wall of sound" production technique that became the wholly new ABBA sound. Stig arranged an English translation of the lyrics by Neil Sedaka and Phil Cody and they thought this would be a sure fire winner. Yet again, it came in third. Nevertheless the proto group put out an album called ''Ring Ring'', still carrying the awkward naming of ''Bj rn, Benny, Agnetha Frida''. The album did well and the "Ring Ring" single was a hit in many parts of Europe but Stig felt the true breakthrough could only come with a UK or US hit.
Around this time Stig, having tired of the unwieldy names, started to refer to the group privately and publicly as ''ABBA''. This was done as a joke at first, since Abba was also the name of a well known fish canning company in Sweden. However, since the fish canners were more or less unknown outside Sweden, Stig came to believe the name would work in international markets and so it stuck. Later the group negotiated with the canners for the right to use the name.
Eurovision and after
" (1974)
" (1975)
They tried Eurovision again in 1974, now inspired by the growing glam rock scene in the UK and tracks like Wizzard's "See My Baby Jive". "Waterloo" was an unashamedly glam style pop track produced with Michael B. Tretow's wall of sound approach. Now far more experienced, they were better prepared for the contest and had an album's worth of material released when the show was held in Brighton, England. The song won hands down and catapulted them into British consciousness for the first time. Now they had a catchy name, ABBA, and people could buy the whole album (''Waterloo'') straightaway.
"Waterloo" was ABBA's first UK No. 1. It was also released in the US, reaching No. 6. But momentum proved hard to maintain, and their follow up singles "So Long" and "Honey Honey" did not do nearly as well. The group was overstretched and unable to promote the songs convincingly in any one country. Moreover, much of their material was still heavily derivative. It wasn't until the release of their second proper album ''ABBA'' and their single "SOS" that ABBA began to show the first signs they were destined for bigger things. "SOS" consolidated ABBA's presence in the UK where it was a Top 10 hit and they were no longer regarded as a one hit wonder.
Much wider success came in 1975 with every release charting solidly and "Mamma Mia" reaching the UK No. 1 spot in January 1976.
At this time the band released the somewhat hubristically titled ''Greatest Hits'' album despite having had only five Top 40 hits in the UK and the US. This album included "Fernando" (an earlier version had been a Swedish language hit single for Anni Frid and included on her 1975 Benny produced solo LP ''Frida Ensam''). Becoming one of ABBA's best known tracks, "Fernando" did not appear on the Swedish or Australian releases of ''Greatest Hits''. In Sweden the song would wait until 1982's ''The Singles The First Ten Years'' to appear in an English language version credited to ABBA the track was later included in the Australian release of their 1976 album, ''Arrival''.
The next album, ''Arrival'', represented a new level of accomplishment in both songwriting and studio work for ABBA. Hit after hit flowed from it: "Money, Money, Money", "Knowing Me, Knowing You" and "Dancing Queen", their most enduring and definitive hit. By this time ABBA were widely popular in the UK, most of Western Europe and Australia (who in a way almost "adopted" ABBA as their own) but still had only moderate recognition and airplay in the US, and "Dancing Queen" remains the only No. 1 ABBA ever achieved there.
'' and ''The Album'' carried the same artwork.
By this time the ABBA sound was synonymous with European pop and was widely copied by groups like Brotherhood of Man and later, Bucks Fizz. Some felt it was necessary to copy ABBA's sound and two girl two boy approach to win Eurovision, and the notion seemed validated when Brotherhood of Man won in 1976 and Bucks Fizz took the prize in 1981.
Meanwhile in 1977 ABBA followed up ''Arrival'' with the more complex ''The Album'' which was released to coincide with ''ABBA: The Movie'', a feature film of their Australian tour. This album was less well received by the critics but spawned several hits, "The Name of the Game" and "Take a Chance on Me", both of which topped the UK charts. This album also carried the well known "Thank You for the Music" that later was released in the UK as a single (1983) and had been a B side of "Eagle" in territories where that song was released as a single.
Later years
By 1978 ABBA was a megagroup. They converted a disused cinema into the Polar Music Studio, a new state of the art studio in Stockholm which was used by several other successful bands (Led Zeppelin's ''In Through the Out Door'' was recorded there, for example).
Their standalone single "Summer Night City", their last Swedish number one, stopped just short of topping the UK charts but set the stage for ABBA's foray into disco with the album ''Voulez Vous'', which was released in Spring 1979. This release marked a slight decline in ABBA's popularity in the UK and Europe but gained them more attention in the US. The hits still came: "Chiquitita", "Does Your Mother Know", "Voulez Vous" and "I Have A Dream" all charted. In January 1979, the group performed at the Music for UNICEF Concert at the United Nations General Assembly, performing "Chiquitita" the royalties from the song were donated to UNICEF.
Later that year, the group released their second greatest hits album, Greatest Hits Vol 2, which featured a brand new track "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)", their best known disco hit.
In 1979 ABBA toured the US and Canada, playing to huge audiences, but the breakthrough there was perhaps too little, too late.
1980's ''Super Trouper'' reflected a change in ABBA's style with more prominent synthesisers and more personal lyrics. It set a record for the most preorders ever received for a UK album after 1 million copies were ordered before release. Anticipation for the release had been built up by "The Winner Takes It All", the group's eighth UK chart topper (their first since 1978). This song was allegedly written about Bjorn and Agnetha's marriage, which was breaking down at the time. The next single from the album, "Super Trouper" also hit number 1. "Lay All Your Love On Me" was an album track that was released in 1981 as a 12 inch single only in limited territories, and, along with Super Trouper, managed to top the American club and dance chart. A Spanish language compilation album was also recorded at this time 'Gracias Por La Musica', which was released in Latin America and sold very well.
''The Visitors'' (1981), their final studio album, showed a songwriting maturity and depth of feeling distinctly lacking from their earlier recordings but still placed the band squarely in the pop genre, with catchy tunes and harmonies. ''The Visitors''nowiki' nowiki title track refers to secret meetings held against the approval of Communist governments in Soviet satellite states and other tracks address topics like aging, loss of innocence, a parent watching her child grow up and so on. Their melodies were still catchy but their change of style was reflected by the start of a commercial decline after their final great pop single "One Of Us" which was a worldwide hit in December 1981.
Although by this time regarded as a group in decline, ABBA still drew huge audiences, particularly in continental Europe and might have gone on indefinitely if it were not for the band's personal turmoils: the two married couples were both divorced by this point. Songs like "The Winner Takes It All" and "One Of Us" gave glimpses of personal issues ABBA's members were facing.
In summer 1982, the group gathered to record a new album. In the end they settled for a double album compilation of all their past successes with two new songs. The double album ''The Singles: The First Ten Years'' topped the UK album chart and was a worldwide bestseller. The new tracks were "Under Attack" and "The Day Before You Came", which was the last song ABBA ever recorded together. Two other songs were recorded during 1982, "I Am The City" and "Just Like That". While both were completed, only "I Am The City" was released on the compilation album ''More ABBA Gold'' in 1993. Despite numerous efforts from fans, Bj rn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson are still refusing to release "Just Like That" in its entirety.
The group gradually drifted apart as they began pursuing different projects. Benny and Bj rn collaborated with Tim Rice to write the musical ''Chess'', while Agnetha and Frida worked on solo albums.
After ABBA
Bj rn and Benny wrote the music for the West End show ''Chess'' (1984) with lyricist Tim Rice. ''Chess'' ran for three years in London. The show also opened on Broadway in the US (1988) but the song order, lyrics and storyline had been altered compared with the London version, and was less successful the show closed within weeks. "Chess" is best known today for producing the international hit "One Night in Bangkok", sung by Murray Head.
Bj rn and Benny, inspired by the successes of Rice and his former collaborator Andrew Lloyd Webber, had long expressed their desire to write a musical. Their first attempt had been a "mini musical", ''The Girl with The Golden Hair'', performed by the group during their 1977 tour of Europe and Australia. Excerpts were included in ''ABBA The Movie'' and ''ABBA The Album''. Bj rn and Benny followed ''Chess'' with ''Kristina fr n Duvem la'' (1995), directed for the stage by Lars Rudolfsson and based on the ''Emigrants'' tetralogy by Swedish novelist Vilhelm Moberg. ''Mamma Mia!'', a musical built around ABBA's songs, had its London premiere in 1999. In 2003, their first musical was given new life in a Swedish language version, ''Chess P Svenska''.
After being largely forgotten throughout most of the 1980s, ABBA experienced a resurgence. The attention was often ironic, along the lines of "they were so naff they were good," yet others recognised that while ABBA was often panned by critics and sneered at by punk and New Wave musicians they were masters of their art, the three minute pop song. 1992 saw a huge revival of interest in ABBA, with the release of their ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits compilation album selling massively worldwide and setting chart longevity records. The revival was further validated by the 1994 film "Muriel's Wedding", a popular Australian film starring an ABBA loving protaganist. Bj rn and Benny were finally recognised in 2001 with an Ivor Novello Award for their songwriting. Many former punk and New Wave artistes later admitted to levels of fondness and respect for ABBA they were unwilling to own up to in their early years.
During the 1990s many ABBA tracks were rediscovered and covered by other artists, such as Erasure, Ash and the A Teens, among others. The avant garde band Blancmange had also covered ''The Day Before You Came'' in the mid 1980s, one of the first bands to cover an ABBA track.
On April 6th 2004 three former ABBA members (Bj rn, Benny and Frida) showed up together in London for the 30th anniversary of their Eurovision Song Contest win in 1974, appearing on stage after the fifth anniversary performance of ''Mamma Mia!''. In a November 2004 interview with the German magazine ''Bunte'' Bj rn said a reunion would not satisfy ABBA's many fans, even though there are legions of them around the world often clamouring for one. In February 2005 all four members of ABBA appeared together in public for the first time since 1986 at the gala opening of ''Mamma Mia!'' in Stockholm.
On October 22 2005, during the celebration show for the 50th anniversary of the Eurovision Song Contest held in Copenhagen, Denmark, ''Waterloo'' was Eurovision song in the history of the contest.
Post ABBA solo careers
Both female members of ABBA have had some success with solo careers following the break up of the band.
In 1982, Frida released her Phil Collins produced album ''Something's Going On'' This album included the hit single "I Know There's Something Going On". Agnetha followed in 1983 with the album ''Wrap Your Arms Around Me''. This album included the hit single ''The Heat Is On'' (a cover of the Noosha Fox recording) which was a big hit all over Europe and Scandinavia that year. In the US Agnetha scored a Billboard top 30 hit with ''Can't Shake Loose''. Her album sold over 1.2 million copies worldwide. Frida retired after her second solo album ''Shine'' flopped. Agnetha fared better with her second post ABBA solo album ''Eyes of a Woman''. The album was number two in the Swedish charts and did reasonably well in Europe.
After ''I Stand Alone'' in 1987 Agnetha withdrew from public life and refused to give interviews. In 1996 she released her autobiography called ''As I Am'' and also released a compilation that featured her solo hits. In 2004 she released a disc of cover songs called "My Colouring Book" which debuted at number one in Sweden and number six in Germany. The album peaked just outside of the British top ten (number 11) and the single ''If I Thought You'd Ever Change Your Mind'' reached number 9 in the UK singles chart. The album went triple platinum in Sweden (300,000 copies), gold in Finland and silver in Great Britain.
Frida released ''Shine'' (produced by Steve Lillywhite) in 1984 but it was not until 1996 that she released her last album to date, the Swedish language ''Djupa Andetag'' which was a number one album in Sweden (selling 90,000 copies) but unknown internationally. In September 2004 Frida recorded a song called "The Sun Will Shine Again" with former Deep Purple member Jon Lord for his latest album, making some rare appearances on German television.
Fashion and videos
! Unsourced image removed:
ABBA was widely noted as an epitome of 1970s fashion for the colourful costumes its members wore. The videos which accompanied some of their biggest hits are often cited as being among the earliest examples of the genre. Though The Beatles and the Rolling Stones had shot the occasional video clip, making promotional videos still hadn't become the industry standard by the early to mid 1970s. Most of ABBA's videos (and ''ABBA The Movie'') were directed by Lasse Hallstr m who would later direct the films ''My Life as a Dog'', ''The Cider House Rules'' and ''Chocolat''.
ABBA made videos because their songs were hits in so many different countries and personal appearances weren't always possible. This was also an effort to minimise travelling, particularly to countries that would have required extremely long flights. Agnetha and Bj rn had two young children, and Agnetha, who was also afraid of flying, was very reluctant to leave her children for such a long time. ABBA's manager Stig Anderson realised the potential of showing a simple video clip on television to publicise a single or album, thereby allowing easier and quicker exposure than a concert tour. Some of these videos became classics because of the 1970s era costumes and early video effects, such as the grouping of the band members in different combinations of pairs, overlapping one girl's profile with the other's full face, and the contrasting of one member against another.
Nowadays, most of their videos can be seen on the DVDs ''ABBA Gold'' and ''The Definitive Collection''.
Several ABBA videos were spoofed by others: The video "Knowing Me, Knowing You" was satirised on the BBC comedy show ''Not the Nine O'Clock News'' as "Super Dooper." The title ''Knowing Me, Knowing You'' was also borrowed for a spoof chat show on BBC starring Steve Coogan as Alan Partridge who always entered the studio shouting "Aha!" (an exclamation in the lyrics). UK comedy duo French and Saunders parodied ABBA with their song "C'est La Vie", an homage to "The Winner Takes it All." Erasure paid homage to the ABBA video style with their video for "Take a Chance on Me."
Trivia
Songwriters Benny and Bjrn were unable to notate music on paper. Only Agnetha could (as revealed in a Dick Cavett interview with the group).
Abba have been spoofed by many TV shows, including ''French Saunders'', ''Not The Nine O'Clock News'' and ''Fast Forward''. In addition, the character of "Alan Partridge" is noted as being a huge ABBA fan, especially on his television show "Knowing Me, Knowing You with Alan Partridge" where all the hosts and all guests were introduced with different ABBA songs.
At the height of their success ABBA was Sweden's biggest export, exceeding even Volvo cars.
While selling their music into Russia during the late 1970s ABBA were paid in oil commodities because of an embargo on the rouble.
The song ''Chiquitita'' was first performed at the Music for UNICEF Concert in 1979. ABBA's performance at the concert was, however, lip synched. All royalties from the song were donated to the children's charity UNICEF in perpetuity.
In 1981, ABBA sponsored the ATS Formula One racing team, for whom Slim Borgudd, a former drummer who appeared on some ABBA recordings, was a driver.
The hit song "Bring Me Edelweiss" (1989) by Edelweiss features the tune and some lyrics from "S.O.S". This caused some controversy between Bjorn Benny, and manager Stig Stig had granted approval to use the song without consulting the others.
The sound track of the successful Australian film ''Muriel's Wedding'' (1994) prominently featured ABBA songs: The two female leads lip sync "Waterloo" and the wedding scene is scored to an orchestral rendition of "Dancing Queen". The movie also features "Mamma Mia", "Fernando" and "I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do".
Another 1994 Australian fillm ''The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert'' features a performance of ''Mamma Mia!'' by two drag queens, furthering ABBA's status as a gay icon.
The ABBA tribute band Bjrn Again became so successful that as of 2004 there were five casts of Bjrn Again performing in various parts of the world. The original Bjrn Again had been touring for 15 years, longer than the original group.
Techno and house remakes of many original ABBA hits were released under the name Abbacadabra.
''Mamma Mia!'' was nominated for a Broadway Tony Award as Best Musical in 2002.
In 2000 ABBA were reported to have turned down an offer of approximately one billion dollars (US) to do a reunion tour.
In 2005 ABBA's 1976 hit single "Fernando" still held the record for the most weeks spent at number one in Australia (along with The Beatles' "Hey Jude").
In addition to being an acronym, the name "ABBA" is also a palindrome. In 1975, ABBA's "SOS" became the first song with a palindromic title recorded by a group with a palindromic name to hit the pop charts.
ABBA was inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2002.
In the film ''Johnny English'', the title character (Rowan Atkinson) is discretely characterized as an ABBA fan. He sings "Thank You for The Music", and lip syncs to "Does Your Mother Know" in front of a mirror.
The Fugees sampled ABBA (as well as Crystal Gayle) for their contribution to the 1996 "When We Were Kings" soundtrack, "Rumble in the Jungle"
Madonna sampled the group's "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)" in her 2005 single "Hung Up".
See also
ABBA discography ABBA's discography and chart positions for UK, USA, Germany and Netherlands.
List of ABBA Unreleased songs
Music of Sweden
List of Swedes in music
Best selling music artists World's top selling music artists chart.
List of number one hits (United States)
List of artists who reached number one on the Hot 100 (U.S.)
List of Number 1 Dance Hits (United States)
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance chart
List of Number 1 singles (UK)
UK Best selling singles artists of all time
List of artists who reached number one in Ireland
List of artists who have covered ABBA songs
List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart
List of songs with particularly long titles
External links
ABBA Discography.
ABBA Singles Discography.
Official site. This site is owned and maintained by "Universal Music AB" in Sweden.
Complete song list, website links reviewed and categorised, selected discography, bibliography, concert information, and much more.
ABBA fan site in English and in Dutch.
ABBA and the musicals CHESS, Kristina and more...
"Vocal Group Hall of Fame" page on ABBA.
Site about ABBA.
ABBA related site.
Song lyrics collection.
Popular ABBA song lyrics.
lyrics, pictures, extras etc.
succession box
before Anne Marie David
title Winner of the Eurovision Song Contest
years 1974
after Teach In
Category:ABBA
Category:Popular musical groups
ABBA
ABBA
Category:Eurovision winners
ABBA
af:ABBA
ar:
bg:
zh min nan:ABBA
ca:ABBA
cs:ABBA
da:ABBA
de:ABBA
et:ABBA
es:ABBA
eo:ABBA
fo:ABBA
fr:ABBA
hr:ABBA
is:ABBA
it:ABBA
he:
lt:ABBA
hu:ABBA
nl:ABBA
ja:ABBA
no:ABBA
nn:ABBA
pl:ABBA
pt:ABBA
ru:ABBA
simple:ABBA
sk:ABBA
sl:ABBA
fi:ABBA
sv:ABBA
tr:ABBA
zh:ABBA
'''Allegiance''' is the duty which a subject or a citizen owes to the state or to the sovereign of the state to which he belongs.
Origin of the word
Mid. English ''ligeaunce'' med. Latin ''ligeantia'' the al was probably added through confusion with another legal term, ''allegeance'', an ''allegation'' the French ''allegeance'' comes from the English the word is formed from "liege," of which the derivation is given under that heading the connection with Latin ''ligare'', to bind, is erroneous.
Usage
The term ''allegiance'' is often used by English legal commentators in a larger sense, divided by them into natural and local, the latter applying to the deference which even a foreigner must pay to the institutions of the country in which he happens to live but it is in its proper sense, in which it indicates national character and the subjection due to that character, that the word is important.
In that sense it represents the feudal liege homage, which could be due only to one lord, while simple homage might be due to every lord under whom the person in question held land.
United Kingdom
The English doctrine, which was at one time adopted in the United States, asserted that allegiance was indelible: "Nemo potest exuere patriam". Accordingly, as the law stood before 1870, every person who by birth or naturalization satisfied the conditions set forth, though he should be removed in infancy to another country where his family resided, owed an allegiance to the British crown which he could never resign or lose, except by act of parliament or by the recognition of the independence or the cession of the portion of British territory in which he resided.
Allegiance is the tie which binds the subject to the Sovereign in return for that protection which the Sovereign affords the subject. It was the mutual bond and obligation between the King or Queen and his or her subjects, whereby subjects are called his liege subjects, because they are bound to obey and serve him and he is called their liege lord, because he should maintain and defend them (''Ex parte Anderson'' (1861) 3 El 121 ER 525 ''China Navigation Co v Attorney General'' (1932) 48 TLR 375 ''Attorney General v Nissan'' 1969 1 All ER 629 ''Oppenheimer v Cattermole'' 1972 3 All ER 1106). The duty of the Crown towards its subjects is to govern and protect. The reciprocal duty of the subject towards the Crown is that of allegiance.
At common law allegiance is a true and faithful obedience of the subject due to his Sovereign. As the subject owes to his king his true and faithful allegiance and obedience, so the Sovereign is to govern and protect his subjects, ''regere et protegere subdititos suos'', so as between the Sovereign and subject there is:
''duplex et reciprocum ligamen quia sicut subditus regi tenetur ad obedientiam, ita rex subdito tenetur ad protectionem merito igitur ligeantia dicitur a ligando, quia continet in se duplex ligamen'' (''Calvin's Case'' (1608) 7 Co Rep 1a Jenk 306 2 State Tr 559 77 ER 377).
Natural allegiance and obedience is an incident inseparable to every subject, for as soon as he or she is born they owe, by birthright, allegiance and obedience to their Sovereign (''Ex parte Anderson'' (1861) 3 El 121 ER 525). A natural born subject owes allegiance wherever he or she may be. Where territory is occupied in the course of hostilities by an enemy's force, even if the annexation of the occupied country is proclaimed by the enemy, there can be no change of allegiance during the progress of hostilities on the part of a citizen of the occupied country (''R v Vermaak'' (1900) 21 NLR 204 (South Africa)).
Allegiance is owed both to the Sovereign as a natural person and to the Sovereign in his or her political capacity (''Re Stepney Election Petition, Isaacson v Durant'' (1886) 17 QBD 54 (per Lord Coleridge CJ)). Attachment to the person of the reigning Sovereign is not sufficient. Loyalty requires affection also to the office of the Sovereign, attachment to royalty, attachment to the law and to the constitution of the realm, and he who would, by force or by fraud, endeavour to prostrate that law and constitution, though he may retain his affection for its head, can boast but an imperfect and spurious species of loyalty (''R v O'Connell'' (1844) 7 ILR 261).
There were four kinds of allegiances (''Rittson v Stordy'' (1855) 3 Sm ''De Geer v Stone'' (1882) 22 Ch D 243 ''Isaacson v Durant'' (1886) 54 LT 684 ''Gibson, Gavin v Gibson'' 1913 3 KB 379 ''Joyce v DPP'' 1946 AC 347 ''Collingwood v Pace'' (1661) O Bridg 410 ''Lane v Bennett'' (1836) 1 M ''Lyons Corp v East India Co'' (1836) 1 Moo PCC 175 ''Birtwhistle v Vardill'' (1840) 7 Cl ''R v Lopez, R v Sattler'' (1858) Dears Ex p Brown (1864) 5 B
(a) ''Ligeantia naturalis, absoluta, pura et indefinita'', and this originally is due by nature and birthright, and is called ''alta ligeantia'', and those that owe this are called ''subditus natus''
(b) ''Ligeantia acquisita'', not by nature but by acquisition or denization, being called a denizen, or rather denizon, because he or she is ''subditus datus''
(c) ''Ligeantia localis'', by operation of law, when a friendly alien enters the country, because so long as he or she is in the country they are within the Sovereign's protection, therefore they owe the Sovereign a local obedience or allegiance (''R v Cowle'' (1759) 2 Burr 834 ''Low v Routledge'' (1865) 1 Ch App 42 ''Re Johnson, Roberts v Attorney General'' 1903 1 Ch 821 ''Tingley v Muller'' 1917 2 Ch 144 ''Rodriguez v Speyer'' 1919 AC 59 ''Johnstone v Pedlar'' 1921 2 AC 262 ''R v Tucker'' (1694) Show Parl Cas 186 ''R v Keyn'' (1876) 2 Ex D 63 ''Re Stepney Election Petn, Isaacson v Durant'' (1886) 17 QBD 54)
(d) A legal obedience, where a particular law requires the taking of an oath of allegiance by subject or alien alike.
Natural allegiance was acquired by birth within the Sovereign's dominions (except for the issue of diplomats or of invading forces or of an alien in enemy occupied territory). The natural allegiance and obedience is an incident inseparable to every subject, for as soon as he or she is born they owe by birthright allegiance and obedience to the Sovereign (''Ex p. Anderson'' (1861) 3 E E 487). A natural born subject owes allegiance wherever they may be, so that where territory is occupied in the course of hostilities by an enemy's force, even if the annexation of the occupied country is proclaimed by the enemy, there can be no change of allegiance during the progress of hostilities on the part of a citizen of the occupied country (''R v Vermaak'' (1900) 21 NLR 204 (South Africa)).
Acquired allegiance was acquired by naturalisation or denization. Denization, or ''ligeantia acquisita'', appears to be three fold (''Thomas v Sorrel'' (1673) 3 Keb 143)
(a) absolute, as the common denization, without any limitation or restraint
(b) limited, as when the Sovereign grants letters of denization to an alien, and to the heirs males of his or her body, or to an alien for term of his or her life
(c) It may be granted upon condition, ''cujus est dare, ejus est disponere'', and this denization of an alien may come about three ways: by Parliament by letters patent, which was the usual manner and by conquest.
Local allegiance was due by an alien while in the protection of the Crown. All friendly resident aliens incurred all the obligations of subjects (''The Angelique'' (1801) 3 Ch Rob App 7). An alien, coming into a colony also became, temporarily a subject of the Crown, and acquired rights both within and beyond the colony, and these latter rights could not be affected by the laws of that colony (''Routledge v Low'' (1868) LR 3 HL 100 37 LJ Ch 454 18 LT 874 16 WR 1081, HL ''Reid v Maxwell'' (1886) 2 TLR 790 ''Falcon v Famous Players Film Co'' 1926 2 KB 474).
A resident alien owed allegiance even when the protection of the Crown was withdrawn owing to the occupation of an enemy, because the absence of the Crown's protection was temporary and involuntary (''de Jager v Attorney Geneneral of Natal'' 1907 AC 326).
Legal allegiance was due when an alien took an oath of allegiance required for a particular office under the Crown.
By the Naturalization Act 1870, it was made possible for British subjects to renounce their nationality and allegiance, and the ways in which that nationality is lost are defined. So British subjects voluntarily naturalized in a foreign state are deemed aliens from the time of such naturalization, unless, in the case of persons naturalized before the passing of the act, they have declared their desire to remain British subjects within two years from the passing of the act. Persons who from having been born within British territory are British subjects, but who at birth became under the law of any foreign state subjects of such state, and also persons who though born abroad are British subjects by reason of parentage, may by declarations of alienage get rid of British nationality. Emigration to an uncivilized country leaves British nationality unaffected: indeed the right claimed by all states to follow with their authority their subjects so emigrating is one of the usual and recognized means of colonial expansion.
United States
The doctrine that no man can cast off his native allegiance without the consent of his sovereign was early abandoned in the United States, and on July 27, 1868, the day before the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, U.S. Congress declared in the preamble of the Expatriation Act that "the right of expatriation is a natural and inherent right of all people, indispensable to the enjoyment of the rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness," and (Section I) one of "the fundamental principles of this government" (United States Revised Statutes, sec. 1999). Every citizen of a foreign state in America owes a double allegiance, one to it and one to the United States. He may be guilty of treason against one or both. If the demands of these two sovereigns upon his duty of allegiance come into conflict, those of the United States have the paramount authority in American law.
Oath of allegiance
''Main article: oath of allegiance''
The oath of allegiance is an oath of fidelity to the sovereign taken by all persons holding important public office and as a condition of naturalization. By ancient common law it might be required of all persons above the age of twelve, and it was repeatedly used as a test for the disaffected. In England it was first imposed by statute in the reign of Elizabeth I of England (1558) and its form has more than once been altered since. Up to the time of the revolution the promise was, "to be true and faithful to the king and his heirs, and truth and faith to bear of life and limb and terrene honour, and not to know or hear of any ill or damage intended him without defending him
therefrom." This was thought to favour the doctrine of absolute non resistance, and accordingly the convention parliament enacted the form that has been in use since that time "I do sincerely promise and swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty ..."
See also
Pledge of Allegiance
References
The original initial text was from the public domain Gutenberg Encyclopedia. Please update as needed
See also Salmond on "Citizenship and Allegiance," in the ''Law Quarterly Review'' (July 1901, January 1902).
'''Allegiance''' is also a computer game by Microsoft Research.
''See:'' Allegiance (computer game)
'''Allegiance''' is also an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation.
''See:'' Allegiance (TNG episode)
de:Loyalit t
es:lealtad
Category:Nationalism
'''Absolute majority''' is a supermajoritarian voting requirement which is stricter than a simple majority. It means that more than half of ''all'' the members of a group, including those absent and those present but not voting, must vote in favour of a proposition in order for that proposition to be passed.
As an example, let's say that a member of a club of 100 members proposes a new bylaw. According to the club's practice, for the bylaw to pass, it requires an absolute majority. The results of the vote are 40 yes votes and 30 no votes. The rest of the voters either abstained or did not vote. Even though this arrangement is a simple majority, since an absolute majority for the club is 51 members, the proposed bylaw fails.
Absolute majority voting is most often used to pass changes to constitutions or to bylaws in order to ensure that there is affirmative support for a proposal. Most voting decisions require a simple majority or even just a plurality.
Examples of absolute majority voting
From 2005, an absolute majority of the electorate in addition to a three fourths vote of the legislature is necessary to pass amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of China on Taiwan as well as to ratify a referendum. The requirement of an absolute majority rather than a simple majority effectively gives both major political blocs the power to veto a referendum or constitutional amendment.
In the politics of the European Union, any decision taken using the codecision procedure requires an absolute majority in European Parliament in order to amend a text in its second reading. (At first reading, only a simple majority is required.)
See also
List of democracy and elections related topics
Category:Elections
Category:Voting theory
es:Mayor a absoluta
'''Afrika Islam''', born '''Charles Glenn''', and known also as the '''Son of Bambaataa,''' is a hip hop producer. He left New York for Los Angeles and went on to co produce most of Ice T's early albums, namely ''Rhyme Pays'' and ''Power'' the latter is deemed to be Ice's finest effort by some aficionados. In the late 1990s, Afrika Islam joined German techno icon Westbam to form Mr. X and Mr. Y, a techno duo that made commercial techno with Electro influences. "Back to Berlin" quotes from the Old School rap classic "New York New York" by Grandmaster Flash.
Islam, Afrika
als:Afrika Islam
de:Afrika Islam
'''Adventure International''' was a video game publishing company that existed from 1978 until 1985, started by Scott and Alexis Adams. Their games were notable for being the first implementation of the adventure genre to run on a microcomputer system. The adventure game concept originally came from Colossal Cave Adventure which ran strictly on large mainframe systems at the time.
After the success of their first game "Adventureland", games followed rapidly, with Adventure International (or "AI") releasing about two games a year. Initially the games were drawn from the founders imagination, with themes ranging from fantasy to horror and sometimes science fiction. Some of the later games were written by Scott Adams and other collaborators. Adventure Internationals' games became known for quality, with a reputation only exceeded in the field at the time by Infocom.
Fourteen games later, Adventure International began to release games drawn from film and fiction. The extremely rare Buckaroo Banzai game, developed with Phillip Case, was based on the film The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the Eighth Dimension (1984). Other games came from a more well known source: Marvel Comics. Adventure International released three games based on the Marvel characters: "The Incredible Hulk", "Spider Man" and "Torch and the Thing".
By the end of 1982, game tastes were changing. The traditional text based adventure game market had moved to graphical based adventures. Games like The Hobbit had increased expectations of such games, and although Adventure International games included graphics of a sort, they were significantly inferior to contemporary offerings at the time and the company was rapidly losing market share.
Adventure International went bankrupt in 1985. The copyrights for its games reverted to the bank and eventually back to Scott Adams who released them as shareware. At its peak in late 1983 to early 1984 Adventure International employed approximately 50 individuals, and published titles from over 300 independent programmer authors.
In Europe the "Adventure International" name was a trading name of AdventureSoft and other games were released under the name that were not from Adventure International in the USA.
Alexis Adams has remained in the online world and runs the online sex site FatFantasy.net .
Scott Adams can be reached through his homepage at www.msadams.com
The Games
Scott Adams's original twelve adventure games were
''Adventureland'',
''Pirate Adventure'' (also called ''Pirate's Cove''),
''Secret Mission'' (originally called ''Mission Impossible''),
''Voodoo Castle'',
''The Count'',
''Strange Odyssey'',
''Mystery Fun House'',
''Pyramid of Doom'',
''Ghost Town'',
''Savage Island'' parts I II, and
''The Golden Voyage''.
External links
Category:Defunct computer and video game companies
'''Altenberg''' may refer to:
Peter Altenberg, an Austrian writer and poet
Vieille Montagne (German name "Altenberg"), a former zinc mine in Kelmis
Altenberg, Germany, a city in Saxony, Germany
Altenberg, Austria, a municipality in Austria near Vienna, on site the family mansion of Konrad Lorenz
de:Altenberg
'''Sir Arthur Charles Clarke''' (born December 16 1917) is the British author and inventor, most famous for his science fiction novel ''2001: A Space Odyssey'', and for collaborating with director Stanley Kubrick on the film of the same name. Clarke is considered one of the Big Three of science fiction, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Isaac Asimov he is the only one still alive.
''2001: A Space Odyssey'' was written concurrently with the film version by Stanley Kubrick. It was loosely inspired by Clarke's short story "The Sentinel", but became its own novel while he was collaborating on a screenplay with Kubrick. Kubrick approached Clarke about writing a novel for the express purpose of making "the proverbial good science fiction movie", and the novel was still being written while the film was being made. This resulted in one of the truly unique collaborations in media history.
Clarke has written numerous other books, including the Rama novels and several sequels to ''2001'', and many short stories, including "The Star", about a Jesuit priest's spiritual dilemma.
An asteroid is named in Clarke's honour, 4923 Clarke, as is a species of Ceratopsian dinosaur, ''Serendipaceratops arthurcclarkei'', discovered in Inverloch in Australia. The 2001 Mars Odyssey orbiter is named in honor of Sir Arthur's works.
In the 1940s he forecast that man would reach the moon by the year 2000, an idea experts dismissed as rubbish. When Neil Armstrong landed in 1969, the United States said Clarke "provided the essential intellectual drive that led us to the moon." ()
He lives in Sri Lanka, and survived the tsunamis of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, but lost his diving school on Hikkaduwa (). Clarke holds citizenship of both the UK and Sri Lanka .
Biography
Clarke was born in Minehead in Somerset, England, and as a boy enjoyed stargazing and enthusiastically read old American science fiction magazines (many of which made their way to England as ballast in ships). After secondary school, and studying at Richard Huish College, Taunton he was unable to afford a university education and consequently acquired a job as an auditor in the pensions section of the Board of Education.
During the Second World War, he served in the Royal Air Force as a radar specialist and was involved in the early warning radar defense system which contributed to the RAF's success during the Battle of Britain. He retired in the rank of Flight Lieutenant. After the war, he obtained a first class degree in mathematics and physics at King's College London.
His most important contribution may be the idea that geostationary satellites would be ideal telecommunications relays. He proposed this concept in a paper titled " Can Rocket Stations Give Worldwide Radio Coverage?", published in ''Wireless World'' in October 1945. The geostationary orbit is now sometimes known as the Clarke orbit in his honour. However, it is not clear that his article was actually the inspiration for modern telecommunications satellites. John R. Pierce, of Bell Labs, arrived at the idea independently in 1954, and he was actually involved in the Echo satellite and Telstar projects. However, Pierce stated that the idea was "in the air" at the time and certain to be developed regardless of Clarke's publication.
Clarke's first professional sale was in 1946 to ''Astounding Science Fiction'', the still memorable short story "Rescue Party". Along with his writing, Clarke worked briefly as Assistant Editor of ''Science Abstracts'' (1949) before devoting himself to writing full time from 1951. Clarke also contributed to the ''Dan Dare'' series and his first three published novels were for a juvenile audience. He has been chairman of the British Interplanetary Society and a member of the Underwater Explorers Club. His work is marked by its optimistic view of science empowering mankind's exploration of the solar system and an obvious influence was the work of Olaf Stapledon.
In 1951, he wrote "The Sentinel" for a BBC competition. Though the story was rejected, it changed the course of Clarke's career. Not only the basis for ''2001'', ''The Sentinel'' introduced a more mystical and cosmic element to Clarke's work. Many of Clarke's later works feature a technologically advanced but prejudiced mankind being confronted by a superior alien intelligence. In the cases of ''The City and the Stars'', ''Childhood's End'', and the ''2001'' series, this encounter produces a conceptual breakthrough that accelerates humanity into the next stage of its evolution.
He has lived in Sri Lanka since 1956, immigrating when it was still called Ceylon, first in Unawatuna on the south coast, and then in Colombo. This inspired the locale for his novel ''The Fountains of Paradise'', in which he describes a space elevator. This, he figures, will ultimately be his legacy, more so than geostationary satellites, once space elevators make space shuttles obsolete.
Early in his career, Clarke had a fascination with the paranormal, and has stated that it was part of the inspiration for his novel ''Childhood's End''. He has also said that he was one of several who were fooled by a Uri Geller demonstration at Birkbeck College. Although he has long since dismissed and distanced himself from nearly all pseudoscience, he still advocates for research into purported instances of psychokinesis and other similar phenomena.
Following the release of ''2001'', Clarke became much in demand as a commentator on science and technology, especially at the time of the Apollo space program. He also signed a three book publishing deal, a record for a science fiction writer. The first of the three was ''Rendezvous with Rama'' in 1973, which won him all the main genre awards and has spawned sequels that, along with the ''2001'' series, formed the backbone of Clarke's later career.
In 1975, his short story ''The Star'' was not included as prose in a new high school English textbook in Sri Lanka, because it was felt that it might offend Roman Catholics, although it had been selected. The textbook caused controversy because it replaced Shakespeare's work with that of Bob Dylan, John Lennon and Isaac Asimov.
Clarke is also well known to many for his television programmes ''Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World'' (1981) and ''Arthur C. Clarke's World of Strange Powers'' (1984).
In 1986, Clarke provided a grant to fund the prize money (initially 1,000) for the Arthur C. Clarke Award for the best science fiction novel published in Britain in the previous year. In 2001 the prize was increased to 2001, and its value now matches the year (i.e., 2005 in 2005).
In 1988, he was diagnosed with post polio syndrome and has since needed to use a wheelchair.
His knighthood was first announced in 1998, but then the British tabloid ''The Sunday Mirror'' published accusations of paedophilia against him (). Clarke's health did not allow him to travel to London to receive the honour personally from the Queen, so the UK High Commissioner to Sri Lanka awarded him the title of Knight Bachelor at a ceremony in Colombo.
He is currently the Honorary Board Chair of the Institute for Cooperation in Space, founded by Carol Rosin and on the Board of Governors of the National Space Society, a space advocacy organization originally founded by Dr. Wernher von Braun.
He was the first Chancellor of the International Space University, serving from 1989 to 2004 and Chancellor of Moratuwa University, Sri Lanka, from 1979 to 2002.
In 2005 he lent his name to the first ever annual dubbed "the Oscars for Space". His brother attended the awards ceremony, and presented an award specially chosen by Arthur (and not by the panel of judges who chose the other awards).
On 14 November 2005 Sri Lanka awarded Arthur C. Clarke its highest civilian award, the Lankabhimanaya ''(Pride of Lanka)'' award, for his contributions to science and technology and his commitment to his adopted country.
Partial Bibliography
Novels
''Prelude to Space'' (1951)
''The Sands of Mars'' (1951)
''Islands in the Sky'' (1952)
''Against the Fall of Night'' (1953)
''Childhood's End'' (1953)
''Earthlight'' (1955)
''The City and the Stars'' (1956)
''The Deep Range'' (1957)
''A Fall of Moondust'' (1961)
''Dolphin Island'' (1963)
''Glide Path'' (1963)
''2001: A Space Odyssey'' (1968)
''The Lion of Comarre Against the Fall of Night'' (1968)
''Report on Planet Three'' (1972)
''Rendezvous with Rama'' (1973)
''Imperial Earth'' (1975)
''The Fountains of Paradise'' (1979)
''2010: Odyssey Two'' (1982)
''The Songs of Distant Earth'' (1986)
''2061: Odyssey Three'' (1988)
''A Meeting With Medusa'' (1988)
''Cradle'' (1988, with Gentry Lee)
''Rama II'' (1989, with Gentry Lee)
''Beyond the Fall of Night'' (1990, Gregory Benford)
''The Ghost from the Grand Banks'' (1990)
''The Garden of Rama'' (1991, with Gentry Lee)
''Rama Revealed'' (1993, with Gentry Lee)
''The Hammer of God'' (1993)
''Richter 10'' (1996, with Mike McQuay)
''3001: The Final Odyssey'' (1997)
''The Trigger'' (1999, with Michael P. Kube McDowell)
''The Light of Other Days'' (2000, with Stephen Baxter)
''Time's Eye'' (2004, with Stephen Baxter)
''Sunstorm'' (2005, with Stephen Baxter)
''The Last Theorem'' (2005)
Omnibus editions
''Across the Sea of Stars'' (1959, including ''Childhood's End'', ''Earthlight'' and 18 short stories)
''From the Ocean, From the Stars'' (1962, including ''The City and the Stars'', ''The Deep Range'' and ''The Other Side of the Sky'')
''An Arthur C. Clarke Omnibus'' (1965, including ''Childhood's End'', ''Prelude to Space'' and ''Expedition to Earth'')
''Prelude to Mars'' (1965, including ''Prelude to Space'' and ''The Sands of Mars'')
''An Arthur C. Clarke Second Omnibus'' (1968, including ''A Fall of Moondust'', ''Earthlight'' and ''The Sands of Mars'')
''Four Great SF Novels'' (1978, including ''The City and the Stars'', ''The Deep Range'', ''A Fall of Moondust'', ''Rendezvous with Rama'')
''The Space Trilogy'' (2001, including ''Islands in the Sky'', ''Earthlight'' and ''The Sands of Mars'')
'' in ''Startling Stories''.
Short story collections
''Expedition to Earth'' (1953)
''Reach for Tomorrow'' (1956)
''Tales from the White Hart'' (1957)
''The Other Side of the Sky'' (1958)
''Tales of Ten Worlds'' (1962)
''The Nine Billion Names of God'' (1967)
''Of Time and Stars'' (1972)
''The Wind from the Sun'' (1972)
''The Best of Arthur C. Clarke'' (1973)
''The Sentinel'' (1983)
''Tales From Planet Earth'' (1990)
''More Than One Universe'' (1991)
''The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke'' (2000)
Non fiction
''Profiles of the Future'' (1962, subtitled "An Enquiry into the Limits of the Possible")
''The Snows of Olympus A Garden on Mars'' (1994, picture album with comments
''Ascent to Orbit'' is what he calls his scientific autobiography
''Astounding Days'' his science fictional autobiography
''The coming of the Space Age famous accounts of man's probing of the universe'', selected and edited by Arthur C. Clarke.
''The Coast of Coral'' with photographs by Mike Wilson and Arthur C. Clarke, volume 1 of the ''Blue planet trilogy''
''How the World Was One: Beyond the Global Village. A history and survey of the communications revolution published in 1992.
''Greetings, carbon based bipeds!'' collected essays, 1934 1998
''Man and space''
''Report on Planet Three and other speculations''
''The promise of space''
Themes, style, and influence
Clarke's early published stories would usually feature the extrapolation of a technological innovation or scientific breakthrough that assists the resolution of a human dilemma. The first manned mission to the moon (''Prelude to Space''), the colonization of Mars (''The Sands of Mars'') and life aboard a space station (''Islands in the Sky'') were all genre SF mainstays. Clarke's background as a technical writer showed in the early novels as a deliberate documentary style, and his characters reflect Clarke's experience by being mostly military or civil service types. Despite this, Clarke's style was open to humour and a degree of whimsy which salted its propagandist tone regarding scientific advancement with a sting in the tail.
A recurring type of character is found in ''The Lion of Comarre'', ''The City and the Stars'', ''The Road to the Sea'', and other works. A young man in a superficially utopian society becomes dissatisfied and restless and seeks to expand his horizons, thereby discovering the underlying decadence of his own society.
''The Sentinel'' introduced a religious theme to Clarke's work. His interest in the paranormal was influenced by Charles Fort and embraced the belief that mankind may be the property of an ancient alien civilization. Surprisingly for a writer who is often held up as an example of hard science fiction's obsession with technology, three of Clarke's novels have this as a theme.
The adapted screenplays of Arthur C. Clarke
''2001: A Space Odyssey''
Clarke's first venture into film was the Stanley Kubrick directed ''2001: A Space Odyssey''. Kubrick and Clarke had met in 1964 to discuss the possibility of a collaborative film project. As the idea developed, it was decided that the story for the film was to be loosely based on Clarke's short story "The Sentinel", written in 1948 as an entry in a BBC short story competition. Originally, Clarke was going to write the screenplay for the film, but this proved to be more tedious than he had estimated. Instead, Kubrick and Clarke decided it would be best to write a novel first and then adapt it for the film upon its completion. However, as Clarke was finishing the book, the screenplay was also being written simultaneously.
Due to the hectic schedule of the film's production, Kubrick and Clarke had difficulty collaborating on the book. Clarke completed a draft of the novel at the end of 1964 with the plan to publish the novel in 1965 in advance of the film's release in 1966. After many delays the film was released in the spring of 1968, before the book was completed. It was credited to Clarke alone. Clarke later complained that this had the effect of making the book into a novelisation, that Kubrick had manipulated circumstances to downplay his authorship. For these and other reasons, the details of the story differ slightly from the book to the movie. The film is a bold artistic piece with little explanation for the events taking place. Clarke, on the other hand, wrote thorough explanations of "cause and effect" for the events in the novel. Despite their differences, both film and novel were well received.
In 1972 Clarke published ''The Lost Worlds of 2001'', which included his account of the production and alternate versions of key scenes. The "special edition" of the novel '' A Space Odyssey'' (released in 1999) contains an introduction by Clarke, documenting his account of the events leading to the release of the novel and film.
''2010: The Year We Make Contact''
In 1982 Clarke continued the ''2001'' epic with a sequel, ''2010: Odyssey Two''. This novel was also made into a film, ''2010: The Year We Make Contact'', directed by Peter Hyams for release in 1984. Due to the political environment in America in the 1980s, the novel and film present a Cold War theme, with the looming tensions of nuclear war. The film was not considered to be as revolutionary or artistic as ''2001'', but the reviews were still positive and it has earned over 40 million dollars since its release in North America.
Clarke's email correspondence with Hyams was published in 1984. Titled ''The Odyssey File: The Making of 2010'', and co authored with Hyams, it illustrates his fascination with the then pioneering medium and its use for them to communicate on an almost daily basis at the time of planning and production of the film. The book also includes Clarke's list of the best science fiction films ever made.
''Rendezvous with Rama''
Early in the millennium, actor Morgan Freeman expressed his desire to produce a film based on Arthur C. Clarke's novel ''Rendezvous with Rama''. The film was to be produced by Freeman's production company, Revelations Entertainment.
Essays and short stories
Most of Clarke's essays (between 1934 to 1998) can be found in the book ''Greetings, Carbon Based Bipeds!'' (2000). Most of his short stories can be found in the book ''The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke'' (2001). They make a good collection of Clarke's non fiction and fiction works, even for those who already have most of his books. Another collection of early essays was published in ''The View from Serendip'' (1977), which also included one short piece of fiction, "When the Twerms Came". He has also written short stories under the pseudonyms of E. G. O'Brien and Charles Willis.
See also
Clarke's three laws
science fiction: authors novels short stories television shows
Arthur C Clarke's List of the best Science Fiction films of all time
Clarketech
Spaceguard
Religious ideas in science fiction
Arthur C. Clarke books
Arthur C. Clarke short stories
External links
: an international BOINC community team
: an essay by Arthur C. Clarke on SETI
''Free Inquiry'' magazine interview Volume 19, Number 2
(February 2004)
, by Zoran ivkovi
at
at
includes image of Clarke at the inaugaration of the Sundial Moratuwa University 1996
by Arthur C. Clarke
references Clarke as a member
The late Trevor Hampton (British pioneer diver) had Clarke as a client
, Devon Island, Nunavut (NASA Haughton Mars Project)
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Category:Arthur C. Clarke
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Category:SETI
Category:Space exploration
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clarke, Arthur C.
bg:
cs:Arthur C. Clarke
da:Arthur C. Clarke
de:Arthur C. Clarke
es:Arthur C. Clarke
eo:Arthur C. CLARKE
fa:
fr:Arthur C. Clarke
id:Arthur C. Clarke
it:Arthur C. Clarke
he:
lt:Arturas Klarkas
hu:Arthur C. Clarke
nl:Arthur C. Clarke
ja: C
pl:Arthur C. Clarke
pt:Arthur Charles Clarke
ru: ,
simple:Arthur C. Clarke
sk:Arthur C. Clarke
sr: .
fi:Arthur C. Clarke
sv:Arthur C. Clarke
th: .
uk:
zh:
The '''Apple Newton''', or simply '''Newton''', was an early line of personal digital assistants developed, manufactured and marketed by Apple Computer from 1993 to 1998. The original Newtons were based on the ARM 610 RISC processor, and featured handwriting recognition. Apple's official name for the device was ''MessagePad'' the term ''Newton'' was Apple's name for the operating system it used, but popular usage of the word ''Newton'' has grown to include the device and its software together.
The Newton in development
The Newton project was not originally intended to produce a PDA. The PDA category did not exist for most of Newton's genesis, and the "personal digital assistant" moniker itself was coined relatively late in the development cycle by Apple's then CEO John Sculley, the driving force behind the project. Newton was, in fact, intended to be a complete reinvention of personal computing. For most of its design lifecycle Newton had a large format screen, more internal memory, and a rich object oriented graphics kernel. One of the original motivating scenarios for the design was known as the "Architect Scenario," in which Newton's designers imagined a residential architect working quickly with a client to sketch, clean up, and interactively modify a simple two dimensional home plan.
For a portion of the Newton's development cycle (roughly the middle third ! exact dates? ), the project's primary programming language was Dylan, a small, efficient object oriented Lisp variant that still retains some interest. Although it was efficient (for its day, and considering its substantial run time dynamism), Dylan was a tough sell for the large format Newton (and for a development team unused to Lisp programming). With the move to the smaller form factor, Dylan was relegated to experimental status in the "Bauhaus Project" and eventually cancelled outright. Had it been retained, Dylan, with garbage collection and close OS integration, would have preceded Microsoft's managed code revolution by over a decade.
The project missed by far its original goals to reinvent personal computing, and then to rewrite contemporary application programming. The Newton project's broad vision fell victim to project slippage, feature creep, and a growing fear that it would interfere with Macintosh sales. It was reinvented as a PDA which would be a complementary Macintosh peripheral instead of a stand alone computer which might compete with the Macintosh.
Technical details
Newton used an advanced object oriented programming system called NewtonScript, developed by Apple employee Walter Smith . One of the major complaints programmers had was that the Toolbox programming environment was overpriced at 1000 (later in the life of the Newton, the programming environment was made available free of charge). Additionally, it required learning a new way of programming. Despite this, many third party and shareware applications were (and continue to be) available for Newton. It has been suggested that the NewtonScript programming system should be made available open source (as "abandonware") but most Newton enthusiasts consider this possibility to be highly unlikely.
Data in Newton was stored in object oriented databases known as ''soups.'' One of the revolutionary aspects of Newton was that soups were available to all programs and programs could operate cross soup meaning that the calendar could refer to names in the address book a note in the notepad could be converted to an appointment, and so forth and the soups could be programmer extended a new address book enhancement could be built on the data from the existing address book.
While the soup concept worked remarkably well within the Newton system itself, it caused several usability issues. First, it made it extremely difficult to synchronize data with other systems, like a desktop Macintosh or PC, making the Newton a data island. Apple's utility to perform this task, the Newton Connection Utility, was exceedingly complex and was never completed to perform to the satisfaction of most users. The realization that a handheld computer needed to work within the existing data environment of its users was key to the success of the later Palm Pilot platform, even though the Palm was technically inferior.
The second consequence of the data object soup was that objects could extend built in applications such as the address book so seamlessly that Newton users could not distinguish which program or add on object was responsible for the various features on their own system. A user rebuilding their system after extended usage might find themselves unable to manually restore their system to the same functionality because some long forgotten downloaded extension was missing. Data owned and used by applications and extensions themselves were tossed in the "Storage" area of the "Extras" drawer. There was no built in distinction between types of data in that area. For example, an installed application's icon could be sitting right next to a database of addresses used by another installed extension further down the list. There was no easy way to get a listing of all user installed objects on a system.
Finally, the data soup concept worked well for data like addresses, which benefit from being shared cross functionally, but it worked poorly for discrete data sets like files and documents. This difficulty in working and sharing data with other systems, stemming from the too revolutionary data object soup system, was a key contributor to Newton's demise.
Earlier MessagePads used Macintosh standard serial ports round Mini DIN 8 connectors instead of the more common trapezoidal DE 9, commonly called DB 9. The 2000 2100 models had a proprietary small flat connector, called an InterConnect port, used with an adapter. In addition, all models had infrared connectivity. Unlike the Palm, all MessagePad models were equipped with a standard PCMCIA expansion slot (two on the 2000 2100). This allowed native modem and even Ethernet connectivity Newton users have also written drivers for 802.11b wireless networking cards and ATA type flash memory cards, a category that includes the popular CompactFlash format, as well as for Bluetooth cards. With the 1xx series, an optional keyboard became available, which could also be used via the dongle on a 2x00. Newton could also dial a phone number through the MessagePad speaker, simply holding a telephone handset up to the speaker, and fax email support was built in at the operating system level, although it required external cards.
The MessagePad 2000 and 2100, with a vastly improved handwriting recognition system, 162MHz StrongARMSA 110 RISC processor, Newton 2.1, and a better, clearer, backlit screen, attracted critical plaudits. Although their size and expense were factors which kept them from being as popular as later PalmOS devices, the Newton still has a small but passionate user base. The final evolution of the Newton's handwriting recognition system is still considered by many to be very impressive, only matched by the more modern Tablet PC handwriting recognition system.
The MessagePad could be used with the screen turned horizontally ("landscape") as well as vertically ("portrait"). A change of a setting would instantly rotate the contents of the display by ninety degrees. Handwriting recognition would still work properly with the display rotated.
The use of 4x AA NiCd (MessagePad 110, 120 and 130) and 4x AA NiMH cells (2x00 series, eMate 300) gave a runtime of up to 30 hours (MP 2100 w 2x 20 MB linear Flash memory PC Cards, no backlight usage) and up to 24 hours with backlight on. While adding more weight to the Newtons than AAA batteries (as used in the MessagePad and MessagePad 100) or custom battery packs, the choice of an easily replaceable rechargeable cell format gave the user a still unsurpassed runtime and flexibility of power supply. This, together with the Flash memory used as internal storage (if all cells lost their power, no data was lost due to the static character of this storage), gave birth to the slogan "Newton never dies, it only gets new batteries".
Apple and third parties marketed several "wallets" (cases) for the MessagePads, which would hold them securely along with the owner's credit cards, driver's license, business cards, and cash. These wallets were even larger than the MessagePads and even less able to fit in a pocket, so they were most often used as a protective case for the unit to shield it from bumps and scratches.
Outcome
Although the Apple Newton was produced for six years, it was never as successful in the marketplace as Apple had hoped. This has been attributed to two primary reasons: the Newton's high price (which went up to 1000 when models 2000 and 2100 were introduced), and its large size (it failed the "pocket test" by not fitting in an average coat, shirt, or trouser pocket). Critics also panned its handwriting recognition. These initial problems marred Newton's reputation in the eyes of the public, and PDAs would remain a niche product until Palm, Inc.'s Palm Pilot, which emerged shortly before the Newton was discontinued. The Palm Pilot, with its smaller, thinner shape, cheaper cost, and more robust Graffiti handwriting recognition system which had been available first as a software package for the Newton managed to restore the viability of the PDA market after Newton's commercial failure. Ironically, Palm Computing was founded by ex Apple employee Donna Dubinsky.
The Newton marketing campaign trumpeted the product's handwriting recognition, though in initial versions it was fairly inaccurate. The original handwriting recognition engine was called Calligrapher, and was licensed from a Russian company called Paragraph International. It was actually quite sophisticated unlike the later Palm Pilot's Graffiti which made the user learn a new handwriting system and write each letter in an input area Newton learned the user's natural handwriting, using a database of known words to make guesses as to what the user was writing, and could interpret writing anywhere on the screen. Newton could also recognize and clean up simple drawn shapes such as triangles, circles, and squares, and had an intuitive system for handwritten editing, such as scratching out words to be deleted, circling text to be selected, or using written carets to mark inserts.
Later releases of the Newton operating system retained the original recognizer for compatibility, but added a printed text recognizer, code named "Rosetta," which was developed by Apple, included in version 2.0 of the Newton operating system, and refined in Newton 2.1. Rosetta was generally considered a significant improvement and many users consider the Newton 2.1 handwriting recognition software better than any of the alternatives since. Recognition and computation of handwritten horizontal and vertical formulas such as "1 2 " was also under development but never released.
The most critical feature of the Newton handwriting recognition system was the modeless error correction. That is, correction done in situation without using a separate window or widget, using a minimum of gestures. If a word was recognized improperly, the user would simply double tap the word and a list of alternatives would pop up in a menu under the stylus. Most of the time, the correct word would be in the list. If not, a button at the bottom of the list allowed the user to edit individual characters in that word. Error correction in many current handwriting systems provides such functionality but adds more steps to the process, greatly increasing the interruption to a user's workflow that a given correction requires. Excellent handwriting recognition (in OS 2.1 and higher) with smooth, modeless access to robust error correction is quite possibly a leading reason for the continued popularity of the device among Newton users.
Even given the age of the hardware and software, Newtons still demand a sale price on the used market far greater than that of PDAs produced by other companies. As of 2004 the Newton 2000 and 2100 can still fetch a price, without accessories, of over 100.
Later efforts
Many prototypes of additional Newton models were spotted. Most notable was a Newton tablet or "slate," a large, flat screen that could be written on. Others included a "Kids Newton" with side handgrips and buttons, "VideoPads" which would have incorporated a video camera and screen on their flip top covers for two way communications, the "Mini 2000" which would have been very similar to Palm Pilot, and the "NewtonPhone" (developed by Siemens AG) which incorporated a handset and a keyboard.
At least one product, the eMate 300 was derived from the Apple Newton, and was offered to schools in 1997 as an inexpensive ( 799 US, originally sold to education markets only) and durable computer for classroom use. However, in order to achieve its low price, the eMate 300 did not have all the features of the contemporary Newton equivalent, the MessagePad 2000 and was cancelled along with the rest of the Newton line.
Before the Newton project was cancelled, it was "spun off" into its own company, ''Newton Inc.'', but was reabsorbed several months later when Steve Jobs ousted Apple CEO Gil Amelio and resumed control of Apple. There has since been continual speculation that Apple might release a new PDA with some Newton technology or collaborate with Palm. Apple continues to deny that such a project will ever happen.
The Apple iPod is somewhat of a descendant of the Newton in that it is a pocket sized programmable device based on the ARM processor. Two ex Apple Newton developers founded Pixo, the company that created the iPod's OS.
Feeding a bit of speculation, Apple put the "Print Recognizer" part of the Newton 2.1 handwriting recognition system into Mac OS X version 10.2 (known as "Jaguar"). It can be used with graphics tablets to seamlessly input handwritten printed text anywhere there was an insertion point on the screen. This technology, known as "Inkwell", appears in the System Preferences whenever a tablet input device is plugged in. Whether Apple will ever utilize such technology again in a handheld device remains to be seen.
In June 2004, Apple CEO Steve Jobs indicated that he was proud that Apple resisted pressure to market a new handheld computer. While a small group of Mac faithful consumers have lobbied Apple to sell such a device, the worldwide market for PDAs was in a decline at the time, and Apple chose not to develop the device because demand would have been inadequate.
Newton models
MessagePad (also known as the H1000, OMP or Original MessagePad)
MessagePad 100 (Supported newer Newton OS)
MessagePad 110 (slightly longer and narrower, with integrated flip cover and retracting stylus)
MessagePad 120 (Up to 2MB RAM, versus 1MB)
MessagePad 130 (backlit)
eMate 300 (backlit with built in keyboard)
MessagePad 2000 (a significant upgrade much faster (162MHz StrongARM versus 20MHz ARM 610, larger form factor)
MessagePad 2100 (raised internal RAM to 4MB)
The NewtonOS was also licensed to a number of third party developers including Sharp and Motorola who developed additional PDA devices that used the operating system. Motorola added added wireless connectivity to the unit, and renamed it the Marco.
A possible Newton revival has been a common source of speculation among the Macintosh user base when patents for a tablet based Macintosh were applied for (http: www.appleinsider.com article.php?id 600), rumor sites jumped at the possibility of a new Tablet PC style Macintosh.
Appearances in popular culture
The Newton was featured in the movie ''Under Siege 2,'' where the main character, played by Steven Seagal, uses it to fax a call for help from a phone on a passenger train.
In early episodes of the series ''The X Files'', the FBI agents use Newtons.
In the end scene of Larry Laffer ''Leisure Suit Larry 6: Shape Up or Slip Out!'' the woman says "I even had a Newton".
The character of Kate Libby in ''Hackers'' has a MessagePad which is seen in a number of scenes.
The hacker in the film ''Jurassic Park'' has a Newton on his desk.
Gary Sinise uses one as the hostage taker in the 1996 film ''Ransom'' starring Mel Gibson.
Daniel Br hl uses one in the German film ''The Edukators''.
The handwriting recognition software was ridiculed on several occasions:
Garry Trudeau ridiculed it in a series of episodes of his popular comic, ''Doonesbury''. The last panel of one strip, which shows a character reading the words "egg freckles?" from his Newton , became an Easter egg in the Newton operating system itself (version 2.0 and earlier). It can be seen by writing the words ''egg freckles'' then highlighting them and tapping the Assist button.
In an episode of ''The Simpsons'' titled "Lisa on Ice", which first aired November 13, 1994, school bully Kearny has his buddy Daulph take a memo on a Newton. When Daulph writes "Beat up Martin" on the screen, the handwriting recognition turns it into "Eat up Martha." Kearny throws the Newton at Martin instead.
In 2004, CNET elected the Apple Newton one of the "Top 10 tech we miss" , mentioning the device's amusing willingness to translate nearly any stroke on the screen to text, allowing the user to generate surreal ''Newton Poetry'' from random scribbles.
Other Uses
There were a number of projects that used the Newton as a portable information device in cultural settings such as museums. For example, Visible Interactive created a walking tour in San Francisco's Chinatown but the most significant effort took place in Malaysia at the Petronas Discovery Center, known as Petrosains.
In 1995, an exhibit design firm, DMCD Inc. was awarded the contract to design a new 100,000 square foot science museum in the Petronas towers in Kuala Lumpur. A major factor in the award was the concept that visitors would use a Newton to access additional information, find out where they were in the museum, listen to audio, see animations, control robots and other media, and to bookmark information for printout at the end of the exhibit.
The device became known as the ARIF, a Malay word for "wise man" or "seer" and it was also an acronym for A Resourceful Informative Friend. Some 400 ARIFS were installed and over 250 are still in use today.
The development of the ARIF system was extremely complex and required a team of hardware and software engineers, designers, and writers. The exhibition design and ARIF coordination team was led by Scott Guerin, the hardware software team by Ted Paschkis, and the writers and interface designers included Paul Trapido and Michael Callan. Mssrs. Guerin and Paschkis went on to found Wivid Systems which specializes in multimedia tour guides for museums.
ARIF is an ancestor of the PDA systems used in museums today and it boasted features that have not been attempted since. For example it was used as an exploration tool in a large exhibit about exploring for oil. A visitor's success completing one task influenced the success or failure of a subsequent task. At the conclusion of the exhibit, the ARIF was docked at an IR port where it was used to control a robotic arm that placed equipment at locations influenced by the users previous lessons. In another exhibit, up to eight devices could be used at to activate a 60 foot diameter model of prehistoric Malaysia volcano eruptions, animal sounds, lighting effects, and wind are among the many effects. This task was accomplished by docking the ARIF at a computer terminal and using it as the input device. There are no touch screens in Petrosains, all interactive systems were controlled by the ARIF.
The Newton was "married" to a primitive packet switching radio system in order to determine its location as the visitor passed through electronic "gateways." When the visitor entered a new room, the radio triggered an automatic area introduction. The radio also delivered time synch'd audio in two languages to a group of users when they watched a video.
In addition to being dual language in all audio and text, the ARIF stored bookmarked information such that at the end of the exhibit, users could choose several items of most interest to be printed out, including a souvenir photograph of themselves superimposed on one of several stage sets.
Jokes
A popular lightbulb joke circled the internet briefly, ostensibly from the newsgroup comp.sys.newton.misc.
: Q: How many Newtons does it take to screw in a lightbulb?
: A: Foux! There to eat lemons, axe gravy soup.
External links
Larry Yaeger's page on the of the Rosetta recogniser engine
touching on the development of the Newton and its HWR
, with photos of prototypes
, HowTos, tricks and manuals
, a searchable index of Newton websites
, Apple has discontinued support for the Newton platform however, repairs and upgrades are still available at this site
, feat. disassembling and repair instructions for most models and reviews of new spare parts and hardware
, a Newton emulator in development
, the largest actively maintained Newton ebook repository
actively maintained Newton ebook repository of public domain and creative commons licensed titles
, a report of Newton usage with an example of ''Newton Poetry''
, some info on and some attemps of ''Newton Poetry''
Newton
Category:Apple hardware
Category:PDAs
de:Newton (PDA)
fr:Newton PDA
ko: ()
nl:Apple Newton
no:Apple Newton
pl:Newton (komputer)
ja:
it:Famiglia Newton (Apple)
sv:Newton (PDA)
'''Alfred Elton van Vogt''' (Winnipeg, Canada, April 26, 1912 Los Angeles, USA, January 26, 2000) was a renowned Canadian born science fiction author widely regarded as one of the most prolific, yet complex, writers from the mid twentieth century 'Golden Age' of the genre.
Science Fiction's Golden Age
Van Vogt was one of the most popular and highly esteemed science fiction writers of the 1940s, during the ascent of the genre's Golden Age. After starting his writing career by writing for 'true confession' style pulp magazines like ''True Story'', van Vogt decided to switch to writing something he enjoyed, science fiction.
Van Vogt's first published SF story, "Black Destroyer" (''Astounding Science Fiction'', July 1939), was inspired by ''The Origin of Species'' by Charles Darwin. The story depicted a fierce, carnivorous alien stalking the crew of an exploration spaceship. It was the cover story of the issue of ''Astounding'' which ushered in the Golden Age of science fiction. The story became an instant classic and eventually served as the inspiration for a number of science fiction movies. In 1950 it was combined with "War of Nerves" (1950), "Discord in Scarlet" (1939) and "M33 in Andromeda" (1943) to form the novel ''The Voyage of the Space Beagle'' (1950)
Many fans of that era would have named van Vogt, Robert A. Heinlein, and Isaac Asimov as the three greatest science fiction writers.
In 1941 van Vogt decided to become a full time writer, quitting his job at the Canadian Department of National Defence. Extremely prolific for a few years, van Vogt wrote a large number of short stories. In the 1950s, many of them were retrospectively patched together into novels, or "fixups" as he called them, a term which entered the vocabulary of science fiction criticism. Sometimes this was successful (''The War against the Rull'') while other times the disparate stories thrown together made for a less coherent plot (''Quest for the Future'').
One of van Vogt's best novels of this period is ''Slan'', which appeared in ''Astounding Sicence Fiction'' in 1940. Using what became one of van Vogt's recurring themes, it told the story of a 9 year old superman living in a world in which his kind are slain by Homo sapiens.
A post war philosopher
In 1944, van Vogt moved to Hollywood, California, where his writing took on new dimensions after World War II. Van Vogt was always interested in the idea of all encompassing systems of knowledge (akin to modern meta systems), the characters in his very first story used a system called 'Nexialism' to analyze the alien's behaviour, and he became interested in the General Semantics of Alfred Korzybski. And he was profoundly affected by revelations of totalitarian police states that emerged after World War II. He wrote a mainstream novel that was set in Communist China, ''The Angry Man'' (1962) he said that prior to this he had read 100 books about China.
He subsequently wrote three novels merging these overarching themes, ''The World of Null A'' and ''The Pawns of Null A'' in the late 1940s, and ''Null A Three'' in the early 1980s. ''Null A'', or non Aristotelian logic, refers to the capacity for, and practice of, using intuitive, inductive reasoning (fuzzy logic), rather than reflexive, or conditioned, deductive logic.
'' (1956)
Van Vogt systematized his writing method, using scenes of 800 words or so where a new complication was added or something resolved. Several of his stories hinge upon temporal conundrums, a favorite theme. He stated that he acquired many of his writing techniques from books on writing by Thomas Uzzell.
He said many of his ideas came from dreams, and indeed his stories at times had the incoherence of dreams, but at their best, as in the fantasy novel ''The Book of Ptath'', his works had all the vision and power a dream can impart. Throughout his writing life he arranged to be awakened every 90 minutes during his sleep period so he could write down his dreams.
In the 1950s, van Vogt briefly became involved in L. Ron Hubbard's Dianetics. Van Vogt operated a storefront, for the secular precursor to Hubbard's Scientology sect, in the Los Angeles area for a time, before winding up at odds with Hubbard and his methods. His writing more or less stopped for some years, a period in which he bitterly claimed to have been harassed and intimidated by Hubbard's followers. In this period he limited to collect old short stories to form notable fixups like: ''The Mixed Men'' (1952), ''The War Against the Rull'' (1959), ''The Beast'' (1963) and the two novels of the "Linn" cyle, which were inspired by fall of the Roman Empire. He resumed writing again in the 1960s, mainly through Frederik Pohl's invitation, while remaining in Hollywood with his second wife, Lydia Bereginsky, who took care of him through his declining years. In this period his stories were born since the very beginning as whole novels, but in general show van Vogt's difficulties in keeping pace with the evolution of science fiction.
Recognition
In 1946, van Vogt and his first wife, Edna Mayne Hull, were co Guests of Honor at the fourth World Science Fiction Convention,
In 1980, van Vogt received a "Casper Award" (precursor to the Canadian Aurora Awards) for Lifetime Achievement. In 1995 he was awarded the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award. In 1996, van Vogt was recognized on two occasions: the World Science Fiction Convention presented him with a Special Award ''for six decades of golden age science fiction'', and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame included him among its initial four inductees.
Critical praise
Famous science fiction author Philip K. Dick has said that van Vogt's stories spurred his interest in science fiction with their strange sense of the unexplained, that something more was going on than the protagonists realized.
In a review of ''Transfinite: The Essential A.E. van Vogt'', science fiction writer Paul Di Filippo said:
:''Van Vogt knew precisely what he was doing in all areas of his fiction writing. There's hardly a wasted word in his stories... His plots are marvels of interlocking pieces, often ending in real surprises and shocks, genuine paradigm shifts, which are among the hardest conceptions to depict. And the intellectual material of his fictions, the conceits and tossed off observations on culture and human and alien behavior, reflect a probing mind...Each tale contains a new angle, a unique slant, that makes it stand out.'' br (DiFilippo, Paul, (2003) '''', Retrieved 9 January 2003).
Criticism
Van Vogt's style has been criticized as confused and incoherent. Writer and critic Damon Knight wrote in 1945 that "van Vogt is not a giant as often mantained. He's only a pygmy using a giant typewriter".
His technical knowledge seems questionable. Examples:
In ''Cosmic Encounter'', one result of the crash of an alien spaceship is the generation of a temperature of minus 50,000 degrees, well below absolute zero.
The title of his story collection ''M33 in Andromeda'' is incorrect M33 is in Triangulum, M31 (the Andromeda Galaxy) is in Andromeda.
The popular short story ''Vault of the Beast'' hinges on the concept of the largest prime number it was demonstrated as far back as Ancient Greece that the series of primes is infinite.
Bibliography
Novels
''Slan'' (1946)
''The Book of Ptath'' (1947)
''The World of Null A'' (1948)
''The House That Stood Still'' (1950)
''Masters of Time'' (1950)
''The Voyage of the Space Beagle'' (1950)
''The Weapon Shops of Isher'' (1951)
''Mission to the Stars'' (1952)
''The Universe Maker'' (1953)
''Planets for Sale'' (1954) (with Edna Mayne Hull)
''The Players of Null A'' (1956) also published as ''The Pawns of Null A''
''The Mind Cage'' (1957)
''Empire of the Atom'' (1957)
''Siege of the Unseen'' (1959)
''The War against the Rull'' (1959)
''Earth's Last Fortress'' (1960)
''The Wizard of Linn'' (1962)
''The Violent Man'' (1962)
''The Beast'' (1963)
''The Twisted Men'' (1964)
''Rogue Ship'' (1965)
''The Winged Man'' (1966)
''Moonbeast'' (1969)
''The Silkie'' (1969)
''Children of Tomorrow'' (1970)
''Quest for the Future'' (1970)
''The Battle of Forever'' (1971)
''More Than Superhuman'' (1971)
''The Darkness on Diamondia'' (1972)
''Future Glitter'' (1973)
''The Man with a Thousand Names'' (1974)
''The Secret Galactics'' (1974) also published as ''Earth Factor X''
''Supermind'' (1974)
''The Anarchistic Colossus'' (1977)
''The Enchanted Village'' (1979) (chapbook)
''Renaissance'' ( 1979)
''Cosmic Encounter'' (1980)
''Computerworld'' (1983)
''Computer Eye'' (1983)
''Null A Three'' (1985)
''To Conquer Kiber'' (1987)
Collections
''M33 in Andromeda'' (1943)
''Out of the Unknown'' (1948) (with Edna Mayne Hull)
''Away and Beyond'' (1952)
''Destination: Universe!'' (1952)
''The Far Out Worlds of A. E. van Vogt'' (1956)
''Monsters'' (1965)
''The Van Vogt Omnibus'' (omnibus 1967)
''The Sea Thing and Other Stories'' (1970)
''The Proxy Intelligence and Other Mind Benders'' (1971)
''The Van Vogt Omnibus 2'' (omnibus 1971)
''The Book of Van Vogt'' (1972)
''Far Out Worlds of Van Vogt'' (1973)
''The Three Eyes of Evil Including Earth's Last Fortress'' (1973)
''The Best of A. E. van Vogt'' (1974)
''The Gryb'' (1976) (with Edna Mayne Hull)
''Pendulum'' (1978)
''The Best of A. E. van Vogt 1949 1968'' (1979)
''Lost: Fifty Suns'' (1979)
''The Best of A E van Vogt 1940 1948'' (1979)
''Futures Past: The Best Short Fiction of A.E. Van Vogt'' (1999)
''Essential A.E. van Vogt'' (2002)
Non fiction
''The Hypnotism Handbook'' (1956) (with Charles Edward Cooke)
''The Money Personality'' (1975)
''Reflections of A. E. Van Vogt: The Autobiography of a Science Fiction Giant'' (1979)
''A Report on the Violent Male'' (1992)
Reference
'A. E. van Vogt Summary Bibliography (Long Works)', Internet Speculative Fiction Database
External links
'Icshi: the A.E. van Vogt information site'
'A.E. van Vogt, 1912 2000: Golden Age SF writer A.E. van Vogt died Wednesday, January26 of complications of pneumonia'
'Weird Worlds of A. E. van Vogt: 1912 2000'
'Al's van Vogt pages', Alan Nicoll
'Writers: A. E. van Vogt (1912 2000, Canada)' (bibliography)
'Transfinite: The Essential A.E. van Vogt: Vast conceptions, startling actions and average people rendered into tomorrow's supermen', Paul Di Filippo
'vanvogt' (van Vogt discussion group)
Van Vogt, A. E.
Van Vogt, A. E.
Van Vogt, A. E.
Van Vogt, A. E.
Van Vogt, A. E.
bg:
de:Alfred Elton van Vogt
es:A. E. van Vogt
eo:Alfred Elton VAN VOGT
fr:A. E. van Vogt
it:Alfred Elton van Vogt
nl:A.E. van Vogt
ja:A E
pl:Alfred Elton van Vogt
ru: ,
sv:A. E. van Vogt
th: . .
zh:
Every April Fool's Day (1 April) since 1989, the Internet Engineering Task Force has published one or more humorous RFC documents, following in the path blazed by the June 1973 RFC titled '''ARPAWOCKY'''. The following list also includes humorous RFCs published on other dates.
List of April 1st RFCs and other humorous RFCs
RFC 527 '''ARPAWOCKY'''. R. Merryman, UCSD. 22 June 1973. A Lewis Carroll pastiche.
RFC 748 '''TELNET RANDOMLY LOSE option'''. M.R. Crispin. 1 April 1978. A parody of the TCP IP documentation style.
RFC 968 '''Twas the night before start up'''. V.G. Cerf, 1 December 1985.
RFC 1097 '''TELNET SUBLIMINAL MESSAGE option'''. B. Miller. 1 April 1989.
RFC 1149 '''Standard for the transmission of IP datagrams on Avian Carriers'''. D. Waitzman. 1 April 1990. Updated by RFC 2549 see below. A deadpan skewering of standards document legalese, describing protocols for transmitting Internet data packets by carrier pigeon.
Fun fact: In 2001, RFC 1149 was actually implemented by members of the Bergen (Norway) Linux User Group.
RFC 1216 '''Gigabit Network Economics and Paradigm Shifts'''. Poorer Richard, Prof. Kynikos. 1 April 1991.
RFC 1217 '''Memo from the Consortium for Slow Commotion Research (CSCR)'''. Vint Cerf. 1 April 1991.
RFC 1313 '''Today's Programming for KRFC AM 1313 Internet Talk Radio'''. C. Partridge. 1 April 1992. Certain portions of this RFC are obsolete: Doppler shift while flying on the Concorde is no longer a problem.
RFC 1437 '''The Extension of MIME Content Types to a New Medium'''. N. Borenstein, M. Linimon. 1 April 1993.
RFC 1438 '''Internet Engineering Task Force Statements Of Boredom (SOBs)'''. A. Lyman Chapin, C. Huitema. 1 April 1993.
RFC 1605 '''SONET to Sonnet Translation'''. William Shakespeare. 1 April 1994.
RFC 1606 '''A Historical Perspective On The Usage Of IP Version 9'''. J. Onions. 1 April 1994.
RFC 1607 '''A VIEW FROM THE 21ST CENTURY'''. Vint Cerf. 1 April 1994.
RFC 1776 '''The Address is the Message'''. Steve Crocker. 1 April 1995. Without content, would we need information security?
RFC 1924 '''A Compact Representation of IPv6 Addresses'''. R. Elz. 1 April 1996.
RFC 1925 '''The Twelve Networking Truths'''. R. Callon. 1 April 1996.
RFC 1926 '''An Experimental Encapsulation of IP Datagrams on Top of ATM'''. J. Eriksson. 1 April 1996.
RFC 1927 '''Suggested Additional MIME Types for Associating Documents'''. C. Rogers. 1 April 1996.
RFC 2100 '''The Naming of Hosts'''. J. Ashworth. 1 April 1997.
RFC 2321 '''RITA The Reliable Internetwork Troubleshooting Agent'''. A. Bressen. 1 April 1998.
RFC 2322 '''Management of IP numbers by peg dhcp'''. K. van den Hout et al. 1 April 1998.
RFC 2323 '''IETF Identification and Security Guidelines'''. A. Ramos. 1 April 1998.
RFC 2324 '''Hyper Text Coffee Pot Control Protocol (HTCPCP 1.0)'''. L. Masinter. 1 April 1998.
RFC 2325 '''Definitions of Managed Objects for Drip Type Heated Beverage Hardware Devices using SMIv2'''. M. Slavitch. 1 April 1998.
RFC 2549 '''IP over Avian Carriers with Quality of Service'''. D. Waitzman. 1 April 1999. Updates RFC 1149, listed above.
RFC 2550 '''Y10K and Beyond'''. S. Glassman, M. Manasse, J. Mogul. 1 April 1999.
RFC 2551 '''The Roman Standards Process Revision III'''. S. Bradner. 1 April 1999.
RFC 2795 '''The Infinite Monkey Protocol Suite (IMPS)'''. S. Christey. 1 April 2000.
RFC 3091 '''Pi Digit Generation Protocol'''. H. Kennedy. 1 April 2001.
RFC 3092 '''Etymology of "Foo"'''. D. Eastlake 3rd, C. Manros, E. Raymond. 1 April 2001.
RFC 3093 '''Firewall Enhancement Protocol (FEP)'''. M. Gaynor, S. Bradner. 1 April 2001.
RFC 3251 '''Electricity over IP'''. B. Rajagopalan. 1 April 2002.
RFC 3252 '''''B''inary ''L''exical ''O''ctet ''A''d hoc ''T''ransport'''. H. Kennedy. 1 April 2002.
RFC 3514 '''The Security Flag in the IPv4 Header (Evil Bit)'''. S. Bellovin. 1 April 2003.
RFC 3751 '''Omniscience Protocol Requirements'''. S. Bradner 1 April 2004.
RFC 4041 '''Requirements for Morality Sections in Routing Area Drafts'''. A. Farrel. 1 April 2005.
RFC 4042 '''UTF 9 and UTF 18 Efficient Transformation Formats of Unicode'''. M. Crispin. 1 April 2005.
Source
External links
on RFC 3751 and 1 April RFCs in general
Category:April Fool's Day
ko: RFC
is:RFC apr lgabb
ru: RFC
zh: RFC
in 2004.
'''Anna Sergeyevna Kournikova''' (Russian: ''' ''', '' nna Serg yevna K rnikova '' born June 7, 1981) was a professional tennis player. She was one of the best known tennis players, even among those who do not follow the game. Anna was born in Moscow, Russia to Alla and Sergei Kournikov her family later emigrated to the United States, and she currently resides in Miami, Florida. Anna's major league tennis career has been curtailed for the past several years by serious back spinal problems, and this might be the end of it. Anna has had some success at the singles game, but her specialty has been doubles, where she has become the world's 1 doubles player at times, and she has won Grand Slam titles in Australia in 1999 and 2002, with Martina Hingis as her partner. With Anna's being taller than the average tennis player, and being strong at the net and at the serve, she fits well into doubles. Other comparable players have been Pam Shriver and Peter Fleming, with numerous doubles championships to their credit, playing with shorter partners, such as Martina Navratilova and John McEnroe. With their skill and good looks, Anna and Martina jestingly called themselves "The Spice Girls of Tennis".
Tennis career
Kournikova dazzled the world at age 13 and 14 in international junior tennis, winning several tournaments including the 1995 Italian Open. Kournikova was 14 years old when she ended 1995 as Junior European Champion Under 18 and ITF Junior World Champion Under 18.
Kournikova debuted in professional tennis at age 14 in the Fed Cup for Russia, the youngest player ever to participate and win. At age 15, she reached the fourth round of the 1996 U.S. Open, only to be stopped by then top ranked player Steffi Graf.
Kournikova was a member of the Russian delegation to the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1997, as a 16 year old, she reached the semi finals of Wimbledon, where she lost to the eventual champion, Martina Hingis by a score of 6 3, 6 2. 1998 was her breakthrough year, when she broke into the WTA's top 20 rankings for the first time and scored impressive victories over Martina Hingis, Lindsay Davenport, and Steffi Graf. Kournikova's two Grand Slam doubles titles came in 1999 and 2002, both at the Australian Open in the Women's Doubles event with partner Martina Hingis, with whom she played frequently starting in 1999.
Kournikova proved a successful doubles player on the professional circuit, winning 16 tournament doubles titles, including two Australian Opens and being a finalist in mixed doubles at the U.S. Open and at Wimbledon, and reaching 1 ranking in doubles in the Women's Tennis Association tour rankings. Her pro career doubles record was 200 71. However, her singles career plateaued after 1999. For the most part, she managed to retain her ranking between 10 and 15 (her career high singles ranking was 8), but her expected finals breakthrough failed to occur she only reached four finals out of 130 singles tournaments, never in a Grand Slam event, and never won one. One contributing factor might have been her habit of entering high profile events with strong fields of elite players. As a player, Kournikova was noted for her excellent footspeed and aggressive baseline play however, her flat, high risk groundstrokes tended to produce high numbers of errors and her serve was sometimes unreliable in singles. Anyone who wins big at doubles MUST serve well. She had a record of 209 129 as a singles player.
Her final playing years were marred by a string of injuries, especially back injuries, which saw her ranking gradually erode. Kournikova has not played on the WTA tour since 2003, but still plays exhibition matches for charitable causes. In late 2004, she participated in three events organized by Elton John and by fellow tennis stars and good friends Serena Williams and Andy Roddick. In January 2005, she played in a doubles charity event for the Indian Ocean tsunami with John McEnroe, Roddick, and Chris Evert.
Anna was also a member of the Newport Beachbreakers in the World Team Tennis (WTT) competition in July and November 2005, playing doubles only. In November 2005 she teamed up with Martina Hingis playing against Lisa Raymond and Samantha Stosur in the WTT finals for charity. In a feature for ''Elle'' magazine's July 2005 issue, Kournikova stated that if she were 100 fit, she would like to come back and compete again.
Media publicity
Much of Anna's fame more, many have argued, than she ever gained in her tennis career has come from the publicity surrounding her personal life as well as numerous modeling shoots. During her debut at the 1996 U.S. Open 1996 at the age of 15, Kournikova's physical beauty was noticed by the world and soon pictures of her appeared in numerous magazines all over the planet. Anna has fine facial features and an attractive body, topped off by long blonde hair, sometimes braided into a meter long queue (pony tail).
Many media outlets have reported that Kournikova was very briefly married to NHL hockey star Sergei Fedorov during the summer of 2001, though her agent and family deny this claim. A number of her relationships with other celebrities, including involvements with pop star Enrique Iglesias (whose video, ''Escape'', she appeared in) and hockey player Pavel Bure, have also featured prominently in the tabloid press.
In 2000 Anna became the new face for Berlei's shock absorber sports bras range, and appeared in the highly successful "only the ball should bounce" bill board campaign. Photographs of her scantily clad form have appeared in various men's magazines, including more than one much publicized Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issues (2004 05), where she posed in bikinis and swimsuits, and in other popular men's publications such as ''FHM'' and ''Maxim''. So far, she has not posed topless or nude for any publications.
Kournikova was named one of ''People'''s 50 Most Beautiful People in 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2003. She has also been voted "hottest female athlete" and "hottest couple" (with Iglesias) on ESPN.com and 2003's "sexiest woman in the world" by worldwide FHM readers for. By contrast, ESPN citing the degree of hype as compared to actual accomplishments as a singles player ranked Anna 18supth sup in its "25 Biggest Sports Flops of the Past 25 Years".
Kournikova had a small role (as a motel manager) in the 2000 film ''Me, Myself and Irene'', starring Jim Carrey.
Books
''Anna Kournikova'' by Susan Holden (2001)
''Anna Kournikova (Women Who Win)'' by Connie Berman
External links
:
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
Kournikova, Anna
bg:
da:Anna Kournikova
de:Anna Sergejewna Kurnikowa
fr:Anna Kournikova
he:
nl:Anna Kournikova
ja:
no:Anna Kournikova
pl:Anna Kurnikowa
pt:Anna Kournikova
ru: ,
fi:Anna Kurnikova
sv:Anna Kournikova
bs:Ana Kurnikova
'''Alfons Maria Jakob''' (July 2, 1884 October 17, 1931) was a Germany German Jewish neurologist. He was the first to recognize and describe Alper's disease and Creutzfeldt Jakob disease (the latter with Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt) and helped greatly in the description of various other neurological illnesses.
Jakob, Alfons Maria
Jakob, Alfons Maria
Jakob, Alfons Maria
de:Alfons Maria Jakob
nl:Alfons Maria Jakob
'''Atheism''', in its broadest sense, is an absence of belief in the existence of gods. This definition includes as atheists both those who assert that there are no gods, and those who make no claim about whether gods exist or not. Narrower definitions, however, often only qualify those who assert there are no gods as atheists, labeling the others as nontheists or agnostics.
Although atheists often share common concerns regarding empirical evidence and the scientific method of investigation and a large number are skeptics, there is no single ideology that all atheists share. Additionally, there are certain individuals whose religious or spiritual beliefs some might describe as atheistic, though those holding such beliefs do not normally describe themselves as atheists.
Atheism should not be confused with the related, but not equivalent, position of antitheism, as many atheists do not directly oppose theism.
Etymology
In early Ancient Greek, the adjective ''atheos'' (from privative ''a '' ''theos'' "gods") meant "without gods" or "lack of belief in gods". The word acquired an additional meaning in the 5th century BCE, expressing a total lack of relations with the gods that is, "denying the gods, godless, ungodly", with more active connotations than ''aseb s'', "impious". Modern translations of classical texts sometimes translate ''atheos'' as "atheistic". As an abstract noun, there was also ''atheot s'': "atheism". Cicero transliterated ''atheos'' into Latin. The discussion of ''atheoi'' was pronounced in the debate between early Christians and pagans, who each attributed atheism to the other.
A.B. Drachmann (1922) notes:
blockquoteAtheism and atheist are words formed from Greek roots and with Greek derivative endings. Nevertheless they are not Greek their formation is not consonant with Greek usage. In Greek they said ''atheos'' and ''atheotes'' to these the English words ungodly and ungodliness correspond rather closely. In exactly the same way as ungodly, ''atheos'' was used as an expression of severe censure and moral condemnation this use is an old one, and the oldest that can be traced. Not till later do we find it employed to denote a certain philosophical creed. (p.5) blockquote
In English, the term ''atheism'' is the result of the adoption of the French ''ath isme'' in about 1587. The term ''atheist'' in the sense of "one who denies or disbelieves" actually predates atheism, being first attested in about 1571 (the phrase ''Italian atheoi'' is recorded as early as 1568). ''Atheist'' in the sense of practical godlessness was first attested in 1577. The French word is derived from ''ath e'', "godless, atheist", which in turn is from the Greek ''atheos''. The words ''deist'' and ''theist'' entered English after ''atheism'', being first attested in 1621 and 1662, respectively, with ''theism'' and ''deism'' following in 1678 and 1682, respectively. ''Deism'' and ''theism'' exchanged meanings around 1700 due to the influence of ''atheism''. ''Deism'' was originally used with a meaning comparable to today's ''theism'', and vice versa.
The Oxford English Dictionary also records an earlier irregular formation, ''atheonism'', dated from about 1534. The later and now obsolete words ''athean'' and ''atheal'' are dated to 1611 and 1612, respectively.
Types and typologies of atheism
Many people have disagreed on how best to characterize atheism, and much of the literature on the subject is erroneous or confusing. There are many discrepancies in the use of terminology between proponents and opponents of atheism, and even divergent definitions among those who share near identical beliefs.
Among proponents of atheism and neutral parties, there are two major traditions in defining atheism and its subdivisions. The first tradition understands atheism very broadly, as including both those who believe gods don't exist (''strong atheism'') and those who are simply not theists (''weak atheism''). George H. Smith, Michael Martin, and (formerly) Antony Flew fall into this tradition, though they do not use the same terminology. (Flew has recently adopted a form of deism.)
The second tradition understands atheism more narrowly, as the conscious rejection of theism, and does not consider absence of theistic belief or suspension of judgment concerning theism to be forms of atheism. Ernest Nagel, Paul Edwards and Kai Nielsen are prominent members of this camp. Using this definition of atheism, "implicit atheism", lack of theism without the conscious rejection of it, may not be regarded as atheistic at all, and the umbrella term ''nontheism'' may be used in its place.
A third tradition, more common among laypeople, understands atheism even more narrowly than that. Here, atheism is defined in the strongest possible terms, as the belief that there is no god. Such usage is not exclusive to laypeople, however atheist philosopher Theodore Drange uses the narrow definition .
Atheism as lack of theism
Among modern atheists, the view that atheism means "without or, polemically, "free of" theistic beliefs" has a great deal of currency. This very broad definition is justified by reference to etymology as well as consistent usage of the word by atheists.
However, this definition of atheism has not gone unchallenged. Although, over the last few hundred years, atheism has evolved and broadened beyond the narrow meaning of "wickedness", impiety, heresy and religious denial, as well as pantheism and similar beliefs, it is less commonly understood to include everything not explicitly theistic. Whether a writer's definition of atheism as an "absence" or "lack" of theistic belief is in fact intended to mean "not theistic" in the widest possible sense, or just refers to particular forms of the rejection of theism (see below), is often ambiguous.
However, while this definition of atheism is frequently disputed, it is not a recent invention this use has a history spanning over 230 years. Two atheist writers who are clear in defining atheism so broadly that uninformed children are counted as atheists are d'Holbach (1772) ("All children are born Atheists they have no idea of God" ) and George H. Smith (1979).
According to Smith,
blockquoteThe man who is unacquainted with theism is an atheist because he does not believe in a god. This category would also include the child without the conceptual capacity to grasp the issues involved, but who is still unaware of those issues. The fact that this child does not believe in god qualifies him as an atheist. (p.14) blockquote
One atheist writer who explicitly disagrees with such a broad definition is Ernest Nagel (1965):
blockquoteAtheism is not to be identified with sheer unbelief... Thus, a child who has received no religious instruction and has never heard about God, is not an atheist for he is not denying any theistic claims. (p.460 461) blockquote
For Nagel, atheism is the ''rejection'' of theism, not just the absence of theistic belief. However, this definition leaves open the question of what term can be used to describe those who lack theistic belief, but do not necessarily reject theism.
The obsolete word ''atheous'', first recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary as a synonym of atheism or impiety, is sometimes used to mean "not dealing with the existence of a god" in a purely privative sense, as distinguished from the negative ''atheistic''. This 1880 coinage captures some of what is intended by the broad definition of atheism, though it is hard to sustain the claim that the philosophical rejection of theism can be characterized in such terms.
Implicit and explicit atheism
The terms ''implicit atheism'' and ''explicit atheism'' were coined by George H. Smith (1979, p.13 18).
Implicit atheism is defined by Smith as "the absence of theistic belief without a conscious rejection of it." Explicit atheism is defined as "the absence of theistic belief due to a conscious rejection of it", which, according to Smith, is sometimes called ''antitheism'' (see below).
For Smith, explicit atheism is subdivided further according to whether or not the rejection is on rational grounds. The term ''critical atheism'' is used to label the view that belief in god is irrational, and is itself subdivided into a) the view usually expressed by the statement "I do not believe in the existence of a god or supernatural being" b) the view usually expressed by the statement, "god does not exist" or "the existence of god is impossible" and c) the view which "refuses to discuss the existence or nonexistence of a god" because "the concept of a god is unintelligible" (p.17).
Although Nagel rejects Smith's definition of atheism as merely "lack of theism", acknowledging only explicit "atheism" as true atheism, his tripartite classification of ''rejectionist atheism'' (commonly found in the philosophical literature) is identical to Smith's ''critical atheism'' typology.
The difference between Nagel on the one hand and d'Holbach and Smith on the other has been attributed to the different concerns of professional philosophers and layman proponents of atheism (see Smith (1990, Chapter 3, p.51 60 ), for example, but also alluded to by others).
Everitt (2004) makes the point that professional philosophers are more interested in the grounds for giving or withholding assent to propositions:
blockquoteWe need to distinguish between a ''biographical'' or ''sociological'' enquiry into why some people have believed or disbelieved in God, and an ''epistemological'' enquiry into whether there are any good reasons for either belief or unbelief... We are interested in the question of what ''good reasons'' there are for or against God's existence, and no light is thrown on that question by discovering people who hold their beliefs without having good reasons for them. (p.10) blockquote
So, in philosophy (Flew and Martin notwithstanding), atheism is commonly defined along the lines of "rejection of theistic belief". This is often misunderstood to mean only the view that there is no God, but it is conventional to distinguish between two or three main sub types of atheism in this sense (writers differ in their characterization of this distinction, and in the labels they use for these positions).
The terms ''weak atheism'' and ''strong atheism'' (or ''negative atheism'' and ''positive atheism'') are often used as synonyms of Smith's less well known ''implicit'' and ''explicit'' categories. However, the original and technical meanings of implicit and explicit atheism are quite different and distinct from weak and strong atheism, having to do with conscious rejection and unconscious rejection of theism rather than with positive belief and negative belief.
People who do not use the broad definition of atheism as "lack of theism", but instead use the most common definition "disbelief in or denial of the existence of God or gods" would not recognize mere absence of belief in deities (implicit atheism) as a type of atheism at all, and would tend to use other terms, such as "skeptic" or "agnostic" or "non atheistic nontheism", for this position.
Atheism as immorality
The first attempts to define or develop a typology of atheism were in religious apologetics. These attempts were expressed in terminologies and in contexts which reflected the religious assumptions and prejudices of the writers. A diversity of atheist opinion has been recognized at least since Plato, and common distinctions have been established between ''practical atheism'' and ''speculative'' or ''contemplative atheism''.
Practical atheism
Practical atheism was said to be caused by moral failure, hypocrisy, willful ignorance and infidelity. Practical atheists ''behaved'' as though God, morals, ethics and social responsibility did not exist. Maritain's typology of atheism (1953, Chapter 8) proved influential in Catholic circles it was followed in the ''New Catholic Encyclopedia'' (see Reid (1967)). He identified, in addition to practical atheism, ''pseudo atheism'' and ''absolute atheism'' (and subdivided theoretical atheism in a way that anticipated Flew). For an atheist critique of Maritain, see Smith (1979, Chapter 1, Section 5) .
According to the French Catholic philosopher tienne Borne (1961, p.10), "Practical atheism is not the denial of the existence of God, but complete godlessness of action it is a moral evil, implying not the denial of the absolute validity of the moral law but simply rebellion against that law."
According to Karen Armstrong (1999):
blockquote During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the word 'atheist' was still reserved exclusively for polemic... In his tract ''Atheism Closed and Open Anatomized'' (1634), John Wingfield claimed: "the hypocrite is an Atheist the loose wicked man is an open Atheist the secure, bold and proud transgressor is an Atheist: he that will not be taught or reformed is an Atheist". For the Welsh poet William Vaughan (1577 sic 1641), who helped in the colonisation of Newfoundland, those who raised rents or enclosed commons were obvious atheists. The English dramatist Thomas Nashe (1567 1601) proclaimed that the ambitious, the greedy, the gluttons, the vainglorious and prostitutes were all atheists. The term 'atheist' was an insult. Nobody would have dreamed of calling ''himself'' an atheist. (p.331 332) blockquote
On the other hand, the existence of serious speculative atheism was often denied. That anyone might ''reason'' their way to atheism was thought to be impossible. Thus, speculative atheism was collapsed into a form of practical atheism, or conceptualized as hatred of God, or a fight against God. This is why Borne finds it necessary to say, "to put forward the idea, as some apologists rashly do, that there are no atheists except in name but only 'practical atheists' who through pride or idleness disregard the divine law, would be, at least at the beginning of the argument, a rhetorical convenience or an emotional prejudice evading the real question." (p.18)
Martin (1990, p.465 466) suggests that practical atheism would be better described as ''alienated theism''.
Other pejorative definitions of atheism
When denial of the existence of "speculative" atheism became unsustainable, atheism was nevertheless often repressed and criticized by narrowing definitions, applying charges of dogmatism, and otherwise misrepresenting atheist positions. One of the reasons for the popularity of euphemistic alternative terms like secularist, empiricist, agnostic, or bright is that ''atheism'' still has pejorative connotations arising from attempts at suppression and from its association with practical atheism (''godless'' is still used as an abusive epithet).
Mynga Futrell and Paul Geisert, the originators of the term ''Bright'', made this explicit in an essay published in 2003:
blockquoteOur personal frustration regarding labels reached culmination last fall when we were invited to join a march on Washington as "Godless Americans." The causes of the march were worthy, and the march itself well planned and conducted. However, to unite for common interests under a disparaging term like godless (it also means "wicked") seemed ludicrous! Why accept and utilize the very derogatory language that so clearly hampers our own capacity to play a positive and contributing role in our communities and in the nation and world? blockquote
Gaskin (1989) abandoned the term ''atheism'' in favour of ''unbelief'', citing "the pejorative associations of the term, its vagueness, and later the tendency of religious apologists to define atheism so that no one could be an atheist..." (p.4)
Despite these considerations, for others ''atheist'' has always been the preferred name. Charles Bradlaugh once said (in debate with George Jacob Holyoake, 10 March 1870, cited in Bradlaugh Bonner (1908)):
blockquoteI maintain that the opprobrium cast upon the word Atheism is a lie. I believe Atheists as a body to be men deserving respect... I do not care what kind of character religious men may put round the word Atheist, I would fight until men respect it. (p.334) blockquote
For more on repressive definitions of atheism, see Berman (1982), (1983), (1990).
Weak and strong atheism
:''Main articles: Weak atheism, Strong atheism''
''Weak atheism'', sometimes called ''soft atheism'', ''negative atheism'' or ''neutral atheism'', is the absence of belief in the existence of deities without the positive assertion that deities do not exist. ''Strong atheism'', also known as ''hard atheism'' or ''positive atheism'', is the belief that no deities exist.
While the terms ''weak'' and ''strong'' are relatively recent, the concepts they represent have been in use for some time. In earlier philosophical publications, the terms ''negative atheism'' and ''positive atheism'' were more common these terms were used by Antony Flew in 1972, although Jacques Maritain (1953, Chapter 8, p.104) used the phrases in a similar, but strictly Catholic apologist, context as early as 1949 .
Although explicit atheists (nontheists who consciously reject theism), may subscribe to either ''weak'' or ''strong'' atheism, weak atheism also includes implicit atheists that is, nontheists who have not consciously rejected theism, but lack theistic belief, arguably including infants.
Theists claim that a single deity or group of deities exists. Weak atheists do not assert the contrary instead, they only refrain from assenting to theistic claims. Some weak atheists are without any opinion regarding the existence of deities, either because of a lack of thought on the matter, a lack of interest in the matter (see apatheism), or a belief that the arguments and evidence provided by both theists and strong atheists are equally unpersuasive. Others (explicit weak atheists) may doubt or dispute claims for the existence of deities, while not actively asserting that deities do not exist, following Wittgenstein's famous dictum, "Whereof one cannot speak thereof one must remain silent."
Some weak atheists feel that theism and strong atheism are equally untenable, on the grounds that faith is required both to assert and to deny the existence of deities, and as such both theism and strong atheism have the burden of proof placed on them to prove that a god does or doesn't exist. Some also base their belief on the notion that it is impossible to prove a negative.
While a weak atheist might consider the nonexistence of deities likely on the basis that there is insufficient evidence to justify belief in a deity's existence, a strong atheist has the additional view that positive statements of nonexistence are merited when evidence or arguments indicate that a deity's nonexistence is certain or probable.
Strong atheism may be based on arguments that the concept of a deity is self contradictory and therefore impossible (positive ignosticism), or that one or more of the properties attributed to a deity are incompatible with what we observe in the world. Examples of this may be found in quantum physics, where the existence of mutually exclusive data negates the possibility of omniscience, usually a core attribute of monotheistic conceptions of deity.
''Agnosticism'' is distinct from strong atheism, though many weak atheists may be agnostics, and those who are strong atheists with regard to a particular deity might be weak atheists or agnostics with regard to other deities.
Ignosticism
:''Main article: Ignosticism''
Ignosticism is the view that the question of whether or not deities exist is inherently meaningless. It is a popular view among many logical positivists such as Rudolph Carnap and A. J. Ayer, who hold that talk of gods is literally nonsense. According to ignostics, "Does a god exist?" has the same logical status as "What color is Saturday?" they are both nonsensical, and thus have no meaningful answers.
Ignostics commonly hold that statements about religious or other transcendent experiences cannot have any truth value, often because theological statements lack falsifiability, because of an epistemological view that renders the ontological argument nonsensical, or because the terminology being used has not been properly or consistently defined the latter view is known as theological noncognitivism.
The use of the word "god" is thus solely a matter of semantics to ignostics, dealing with word use and technicalities rather than with existence and reality.
In ''Language, Truth and Logic'', Ayer stated that theism, atheism and agnosticism were equally meaningless, insofar as they treat the question of the existence of God as a real question. However, there are varieties of atheism and agnosticism which do not necessarily agree that the question is meaningful, especially using the "lack of theism" definition of atheism. Despite Ayer's criticism of atheism (perhaps using the definition typically associated with strong atheism), Ignosticism is usually counted as a form of atheism Ayer (1966) was clear on his position:
blockquoteI do not believe in God. It seems to me that theists of all kinds have very largely failed to make their concept of a deity intelligible and to the extent that they have made it intelligible, they have given us no reason to think that anything answers to it. (p226) blockquote
The ignostic position is mentioned (though the term ''ignostic'' is not used) as one of the three forms of "critical atheism" (in Smith) or "rejectionist atheism" (in Nagel). Active disbelief in god or supernatural beings is one other type of critical rejectionist atheism. Finally, the third type is the positive claim that deities do not exist. Since critical rejectionist atheism is a type of explicit atheism, if follows that ignosticism is a type of explicit atheism. There is some debate over whether it should be classified as weak atheism or strong atheism.
Ignosticism is distinct from apatheism in that while ignostics hold ''questions'' and ''discussions'' of whether deities exist to be meaningless, apatheists hold that even a hypothetical ''answer'' to such questions would be completely irrelevant to human existence.
Gnostic and agnostic atheism
:''Main article: Agnostic atheism''
Agnostic atheism is a fusion of atheism or nontheism with agnosticism, the epistemological position that the existence or nonexistence of deities is unknown (weak agnosticism) or unknowable (strong agnosticism). Agnostic atheism is typically contrasted with agnostic theism, the belief that deities exist even though it is impossible to know that deities exist, and with gnostic atheism, the belief that there is enough information to determine that deities do not exist.
''Agnostic atheism'''s definition varies, just as the definitions of agnosticism and atheism do. It may be a combination of lack of theism with strong agnosticism, the view that it is impossible to know whether deities exist to any reliable degree. It may also be a combination of lack of theism with weak agnosticism, the view that there is not currently enough information to decide whether or not a deity exists, but that there may be enough in the future.
''Gnostic atheism'' is a more rarely used term, because often anyone who is not labeled as agnostic is assumed to be gnostic by default. Gnostic atheism also has varying meanings. When nontheism is combined with strong gnosticism, it denotes the belief that it is rational to be absolutely certain that deities do not, and perhaps cannot, exist. When it is with weak gnosticism, it denotes the belief that there is enough information to be reasonably sure that deities do not exist, but not absolutely certain. The term should not be confused with Gnosticism.
''Gnostic atheism'' is also sometimes used as a synonym of strong atheism, and thus ''agnostic atheism'' is occasionally a synonym for weak atheism. This is similar to the more common confusion of the terms ''implicit atheism'' and ''explicit atheism'' with strong and weak atheism.
Apatheism often overlaps with agnostic atheism, such as with apathetic agnosticism, a fusion of apatheism with strong agnostic atheism.
Atheism in philosophical naturalism
Many, if not most, atheists have preferred to say that atheism is a lack of a belief, rather than a belief in its own right (see, for example, Krueger (1998, p.22 24) Smith (1979, p.15 16)). This keeps the burden of proof on the theist (see Flew (1984b)), as the only one making any positive assertions. "Belief" also has other connotations that many atheists may wish to avoid.
Nevertheless, some atheist writers identify atheism with the naturalistic world view, and defend it on that basis. The case for naturalism is used as a positive argument for atheism. See, for example, Thrower (1971), Harbour (2001), Nielsen (2001) and Baggini (2003). See also Everitt's discussion of an anti atheist argument against naturalism (2004, Chapter 9, p.178 190).
According to Thrower,
blockquoteMuch atheism... can be understood only in the light of the current theism which it was concerned to reject. Such atheism is relative. There is, however, a way of looking at and interpreting events in the world, whose origins... can be seen as early as the beginnings of speculative thought itself, and which I shall call naturalistic, that is atheistic per se, in the sense that it is incompatible with any and every form of supernaturalism... naturalistic or absolute atheism is both fundamentally more important, and more interesting, representing as it does one polarity in the development of the human spirit. (p.3 4) blockquote
Julian Baggini argues that, "atheism can be understood not simply as a denial of religion, but as a self contained belief system, if it is seen as a commitment to the view that there is only one world and this is the world of nature" (p.74). For Baggini, therefore,
blockquotethe evidence for atheism is to be found in the fact that there is a plethora of evidence for the truth of naturalism and an absence of evidence for anything else. 'Anything else' of course includes God, but it also includes goblins, hobbits, and truly everlasting gobstoppers. There is nothing special about God in this sense. God is just one of the things that atheists don't believe in, it just happens to be the thing that, for historical reasons, gave them their name. (p.17) blockquote
Baggini's position is that "an atheist does not usually believe in the existence of immortal souls, life after death, ghosts, or supernatural powers. Although strictly speaking an atheist could believe in any of these things and still remain an atheist... the arguments and ideas that sustain atheism tend naturally to rule out other beliefs in the supernatural or transcendental" (p.3 4).
Michael Martin (1990, p.470) notes that the view that "naturalism is compatible with nonatheism is true only if 'god' is understood in a most peculiar and misleading way", but he also points out that "atheism does not entail naturalism".
Antitheism
:''Main article: Antitheism''
''Antitheism'' (sometimes hyphenated) typically refers to a direct opposition to theism. In this use, it is a form of critical strong atheism. Antitheism may sometimes overlap with ignosticism, the view that theism is inherently meaningless, and may directly contradict apatheism, the view that theism is irrelevant rather than dangerous.
However, ''antitheism'' is also sometimes used, particularly in religious contexts, to refer to opposition to God or divine things, rather than to the belief in God. Using the latter definition, it may be possible or perhaps even necessary to be an antitheist without being an atheist or nontheist.
Antitheists may believe that theism is actually harmful, or may simply be atheists who have little tolerance for views they perceive as irrational. Strong atheists who are not antitheists may believe positively that deities do not exist, but not believe that theism is directly harmful or necessitates opposition.
History
Although the actual term ''atheism'' originated in 16th Century France, ideas that would be recognized as atheistic today existed even before Classical Antiquity. Epicurus proposed theories that can be classified as atheistic, such as a lack of belief in an afterlife, though he remained ambiguous concerning the actual existence of deities. Before him, Socrates was sentenced to death partly on the grounds that he was an atheist, although he did express belief in several forms of divinity, as recorded in Plato's ''Apology''. This criminal connotation attached to atheistic ideas (heresy) would remain, at varying levels of severity, until the Renaissance, when criticism of the Church became more prevalent and tolerated.
Atheism disappeared from the philosophy of the Greek and Roman traditions as Christianity gained influence. During the Age of Enlightenment, the concept of atheism re emerged as an accusation against those who questioned the religious status quo, but by the late 18th century it had become the philosophical position of a growing minority. By the 20th century, along with the spread of rationalism and secular humanism, atheism had become common, particularly among scientists (see international survey of contemporary atheism). In the 20th Century, atheism also became a staple of the various Communist regimes, helping return some of the negative connotations of atheism, especially in the United States, where the term became synonymous with being unpatriotic during the Cold War.
Distribution of atheists
Though atheists are a minority group in most countries, they are relatively common in Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, in former and present communist states, and, to a lesser extent, in the United States.
Atheism is particularly prevalent among scientists, a tendency already quite marked at the beginning of the 20th century, developing into a dominant one during the course of the century. In 1914, James H. Leuba found that 58 of 1,000 randomly selected U.S. natural scientists expressed "disbelief or doubt in the existence of God". The same study, repeated in 1996, gave a similar percentage of 60.7 this number is 93 among the members of the National Academy of Sciences. Expressions of positive disbelief rose from 52 to 72 . (See also The relationship between religion and science).
Atheism in the United Kingdom
A poll in 2004 by the BBC put the number of people who do not believe in God to be 40 , while a YouGov poll in the same year put the percentage of non believers at 35 with 21 uncertain
. In the YouGov poll men were less likely to
believe in god than women and younger people were less likely to believe in god than older people.
In early 2004, it was announced that atheism would be taught during religious education classes in the United Kingdom. A spokesman for the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority stated: "There are many children in England who have no religious affiliation and their beliefs and ideas, whatever they are, should be taken very seriously." There is also considerable debate in the U.K. on the status of faith based schools, which use religious as well as academic selection criteria. The decision was based on a Parliament decision ruling that, while questionable in moral standing, Atheism is a legitimate religion (although atheism is not a religion in any sense, this indicates that atheism should be treated the same as theism). Atheism is championed by many scientists and philosophers in the United Kingdom including Richard Dawkins.
Atheism in the United States
A Gallup poll in 2005 showed 5 of the US population feel that God does not exist . However, unbelief in God does not imply self identification as an atheist.
Atheists are ostensibly legally protected from discrimination in the United States. They have been among the strongest advocates of the legal separation of church and state. American courts have regularly, if controversially, interpreted the constitutional requirement for separation of church and state as protecting the freedoms of non believers, as well as prohibiting the establishment of any state religion. Atheists often sum up the legal situation with the phrase: "Freedom of religion also means freedom ''from'' religion."
In Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet Everson v. Board of Education established that "''neither a state nor the Federal Government can''...'' pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions, or prefer one religion over another''". This applies the Establishment Clause to the states as well as the federal government. However, several state constitutions make the protection of persons from religious discrimination conditional on their acknowledgement of the existence of a deity, apparently making freedom of religion in those states inapplicable to atheists. These state constitutional clauses have not been tested. Additionally, some state constitutions (namely, Arkansas and South Carolina) disallow atheists to hold public office, although most agree that, if challenged, these requirements would be ruled unconstitutional under Article Six of the United States Constitution which bans such qualifications. Civil rights cases are typically brought in federal courts so such state provisions are mainly of symbolic importance.
In the Newdow case, after a father challenged the phrase "under God" in the United States Pledge of Allegiance, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found the phrase unconstitutional. Although the decision was stayed pending the outcome of an appeal, there was the prospect that the pledge would cease to be legally usable without modification in schools in the western United States, over which the Ninth Circuit has jurisdiction. This resulted in political furor, and both houses of Congress passed resolutions condemning the decision, nearly unanimously. A very large group consisting of almost the entire Senate and House was televised standing on the steps of Congress, hands over hearts, swearing the pledge and shouting out "under God". The Supreme Court subsequently reversed the decision, ruling that Michael Newdow did not have standing to bring his case, thus disposing of the case without ruling on the constitutionality of the pledge.
Atheism studies and statistics
As some governments have strongly promoted atheism, whilst others have strongly condemned it, atheism may be either over reported or under reported for different countries. There is a great deal of room for debate as to the accuracy of any method of estimation, as the opportunity for misreporting (intentionally or not) a belief system without an organized structure is high. Also, many surveys on religious identification ask people to identify themselves as "agnostics" or "atheists", which is potentially confusing, since these terms are interpreted differently by many different people, with some identifying themselves as being both atheist and agnostic. Additionally, many of these surveys only gauge the number of irreligious people, not the number of actual atheists, or group the two together.
The following surveys are in chronological order, but as they are different studies with different methodologies it would be inaccurate to infer trends on the prevalence of atheism from them:
A 1995 survey attributed to the Encyclop dia Britannica indicates that the non religious are about 14.7 of the world's population, and atheists around 3.8 .
The 2001 found that while 29.5 million U.S. Americans (14.1 ) describe themselves as "without religion", only 902,000 (0.4 ) positively claim to be atheist, with another 991,000 (0.5 ) professing agnosticism.
In the 2001 Australian Census 15.5 of respondents ticked "no religion", and a further 11.7 either did not state their religion or were deemed to have described it inadequately (there was a popular and successful campaign at the time to have people describe themselves as Jedi).
The 2001 New Zealand census showed that 40 of the respondents claimed "no religion".
In 2001, the provided census information on the ten million people in the Czech Republic. 59 had no religion, 32.2 were religious, and 8.8 did not answer. This suggests that the Czech Republic is probably the most atheistic country in the world.
In 2002 survey in Russia, 32 self described as atheist. Of the 58 self describing as Russian Orthodox Christian, 42 said they had never been in a church.
A 2002 survey by Adherents.com estimates the proportion of the world's people who are "secular, non religious, agnostics and atheists" as about 14 .
In a 2003 poll in France, 54 of those polled identified themselves as "faithful", 33 as atheist, 14 as agnostic, and 26 as "indifferent".
A 2004 survey by the BBC in 10 countries showed the proportion of the population "who don't believe in God" varying between 0 and 44 , with an average close to 17 in the countries surveyed. About 8 of the respondents stated specifically that they consider themselves to be atheists.
A 2004 survey by the CIA in the World Factbook estimates about 12.5 of the world's population are non religious, and about 2.4 are atheists.
A 2004 survey by the Pew Research Center showed that in the United States, 12 of people under 30 and 6 of people over 30 could be characterized as non religious.
A 2005 poll by AP Ipsos surveyed ten countries. Of the developed nations, people in the United States had most certainty about the existence of god or a higher power (2 atheist, 4 agnostic), while France had the most skeptics (19 atheist, 16 agnostic). On the religion question, South Korea had the greatest percentage without a religion (41 ) while Italy had the smallest (5 ).
A 2006 survey in the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten (on February 17), saw 1006 inhabitants of Norway answering the question "What do you believe in?". 29 answered "I believe in a god or deity", 23 answered "I believe in a higher power without being certain of what", 26 answered "I don't believe in god or higher powers", and 22 answered "I am in doubt". Depending on the definition of atheism, Norway thus has between 49 and 71 atheists. Still, some 85 of the population are members of the Norwegian state's official Lutheran Protestant church. Parts of this deviance is due to the fact that all non affilated Norwegians were signed into this church a few years before (without being asked), and that signing out, if they are even aware of being signed in, is a time consuming, bureaucratic affair yielding no immediate gains.
Statistical problems
Statistics on atheism are often difficult to accurately represent for a variety of reasons.
Atheism is nonexclusive
Atheism is a position compatible with other forms of identity. Some atheists also consider themselves Agnostic, Buddhist, Jains or hold other related philosophical beliefs. Therefore, given limited poll options, some may use other terms to describe their identity.
Misrepresentation
Some politically motivated organizations that report or gather population statistics may, intentionally or unintentionally, misrepresent atheists. Survey designs may bias results due to the nature of elements such as the wording of questions and the available response options. Also, many atheists, particularly former Catholics, are still counted as Christians in church rosters, although surveys generally ask samples of the population and do not look in church rosters. Some Christians believe that ''"once a person is nowiki truly nowiki saved, that person is always saved"'', a doctrine known as eternal security. .
Attitudes toward religion
Statistics are generally collected on the assumption that religion is a categorical variable. As terms such as ''weak atheism'' and ''strong atheism'' suggest, however, people vary in terms of the strength of their convictions. Instruments have been designed to measure attitudes toward religion, including one that was used by L. L. Thurstone. This may be a particularly important consideration among people who have neutral attitudes, as it is more likely prevailing social norms will influence the responses of such people on survey questions which effectively force respondents to categorize themselves either as belonging to a particular relgion or belonging to no religion.
Misunderstanding and external pressure
A negative perception of atheists and pressure from family and peers may also cause some atheists to disassociate themselves from atheism. Misunderstanding of the term may also be a reason some label themselves differently.
Discrimination
Legal and social discrimination against atheists in some places may lead some to deny or conceal their atheism due to fears of persecution.
For example, in the 20th century, atheists, socialists and communists were persecuted alongside Jews by the Nazis, who lumped all of these terms into one complex issue or theme ('the Jewish Bolshevik world conspiracy', as addressed in Joseph Goebbels' 1935 speech "Communism with the Mask Off", in which Christian civilization national socialism was described as antithetical to Jewish Communism).
Religion and atheism
Spiritual and religious atheism
Although atheistic beliefs are often accompanied by a total lack of supernatural beliefs, this is not an aspect, or even a necessary consequence, of atheism. Indeed, there are many atheists who are not irreligious or secular. These are most common in spiritualities like Buddhism and Taoism, but they also exist in sects of religions that are usually very theistic by nature, such as Christianity, especially in some Liberal Quaker groups.
A number of atheistic churches have been established, such as the , naturalistic pantheists, Brianism, and the Fellowship of Reason. There is also an atheist presence in Unitarian Universalism, an extremely inclusivist religion.
Belief in God as a non being
In English, believers usually refer to the monotheistic Abrahamic god as "God". In many abstract or esoteric interpretations of monotheism or henotheism, God is not thought of as a supernatural being, as a deity or god. Rather, God becomes a philosophical category: the All, the One, the Ultimate, the Absolute Infinite, the Transcendent, the Divine Ground, Being or Existence itself, etc. For example, such views are typical of pantheism, panentheism, and religious monism. Attributing anthropomorphic characteristics to God may be regarded as idolatry, blasphemy, or symbolism by some. Some theists may not believe in, or may even deny, the existence of deities as supernatural beings, while maintaining a belief in god as so conceived.
For example, the Protestant theologian Paul Tillich described God as the "ground of Being", the "power of Being", or as "Being itself", and caused controversy by making the statement that "God does not exist", resulting in him occasionally being labelled as an atheist. Nevertheless, for Tillich, God is not "a" being that exists among other beings, but is Being itself. For him, God does not "exist" except as a concept or principle God is the basis of Being, the metaphysical power by which Being triumphs over non Being.
However, most atheists who deny the existence of deities as supernatural beings would also deny this and similar conceptions of God, or simply consider them incomprehensible. Even the broadest definitions of atheism often do not include belief in a conceptual or metaphysical God, categorizing this under theism instead.
Judaism
In general, formulations of Jewish principles of faith require a belief in God (represented by Judaism's paramount prayer, the Shema). In many modern movements in Judaism, rabbis have generally considered the behavior of a Jew to be the determining factor in whether or not one is considered an adherent of Judaism. Within these movements it is often recognized that it is possible for a Jew to strictly practise Judaism as a faith, while at the same time being an agnostic or atheist, giving rise to the joke: "Q: What do you call a Jew who doesn't believe in God? A: A Jew." It is also worth noting that Reconstructionism does not require any belief in a deity, and that certain popular Reform prayer books, such as ''Gates of Prayer'', offer some services without mention of God.
Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook , first Chief Rabbi of the Jewish community in pre state Israel, held that atheists were not actually denying God: rather, they were denying one of man's many images of God. Since any man made image of God can be considered an idol, Kook held that, in practice, one could consider atheists as helping true religion burn away false images of God, thus in the end serving the purpose of true monotheism.
Some Jewish atheists reject Judaism, but wish to continue identifying themselves with the Jewish people and culture. See, for example, Levin (1995). Jewish atheists who practice Humanistic Judaism embrace Jewish culture and history, rather than belief in a supernatural god, as the sources of their Jewish identity.
Christianity
By necessity, Christianity, as a theistic and proselytising religion views atheism as sinful. According to Psalm 14:1, "The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God." According to John 3:18 19, all who reject Christianity (and presumably its attendant theism) do so "because their deeds are evil".
A famous but idiosyncratic atheistic belief is that of Thomas Altizer. His book ''The Gospel of Christian Atheism'' (1967) proclaims the highly unusual view that God has literally died, or self annihilated. According to Altizer, this is nevertheless "a Christian confession of faith" (p.102). Making clear the difference between his position and that of both Nietzsche's notion of the death of God and the stance of theological non realists, Altizer says:
blockquoteTo confess the death of God is to speak of an actual and real event, not perhaps an event occurring in a single moment of time or history, but notwithstanding this reservation an event that has actually happened both in a cosmic and in a historical sense.(p.103) blockquote
However, many would dispute whether this is an atheist position at all, as belief in a dead God implies that God once existed and was alive. Atheism typically entails a lack of belief that any gods ''ever'' existed, as opposed to not existing currently. For further discussion, see Lyas (1970).
Other, unrelated practitioners of Christian atheism may include Liberal Christian atheists who follow the teaching of Jesus, but who may not believe in the literal existence of god. In this case, however, many would dispute whether the atheists in question are truly Christians, though they certainly are by some of the looser definitions of the word.
It should be noted that although Christianity as a ''faith'' has to be construed as irreconcilable with atheism, this is markedly not the case regarding the church institutions which currently are nominally Christian. Indeed the great positivist luminaries in all earnestness encompassed a Catholic Church which would retain all it's ceremonies and ecclesiastical structures, whilst transforming into a purely atheistic church, much in the same way that christianity has co opted the organisational traditions of the native faiths it has encountered around the world, and through the ages.
Islam
In Islam, atheists are categorized as kafir ( ), a term that is also used to describe polytheists, and that translates roughly as "denier" or "concealer". The noun ''kafir'' carries connotations of blasphemy and disconnection from the Islamic community. In Arabic, "atheism" is generally translated ''ilhad'' ( ), although this also means "heresy".
As the Sharia punishment for apostasy in Islam is death and such apostasy is also widely socially disapproved of, atheists (as well as converts from Islam to other religions) in Islamic countries and communities frequently conceal their non belief. The surveys mentioned above that indicate 100 religious belief in certain Islamic countries should be interpreted in light of this fact.
Asian spirituality
It is difficult to categorize the Eastern thought systems in distinct terms of theism or atheism. Therefore, it should be noted that even the thoughts that would be characterized as atheistic in the western sense, often have some theistic tendencies, and vice versa.
Carvaka (also ''Charvaka'') was a materialist and atheist school of thought in India, which is now known principally from fragments cited by its Hindu and Buddhist opponents. The proper aim of a Carvakan, according to these sources, was to live a prosperous, happy, productive life in this world (cf Epicureanism). There is some evidence that the school persisted until at least 1578.
Buddhism is often described as atheistic, since Buddhist authorities and canonical texts do not affirm, and sometimes deny, the following:
The existence of a creation, and therefore of a creator god
That a god, gods, or other divine beings are the source of moral imperatives
That human beings or other creatures are responsible to a god or gods for their actions
Buddhists might also be deemed atheistic in anti Buddhist Hindu polemic, since Buddhists opposed the authority of the Vedas and of Vedic priests, and the power of the rituals of Vedic religion.
However, all canonical Buddhist texts that mention the subject accept the ''existence'' (as distinct from the ''authority'') of a great number of deities, including the Vedic deities. From the point of view of Western theism, certain concepts of the Buddha found in the Mahayana school of Buddhism, e.g. of Amitabha or the Adibuddha may seem to share characteristics with Western concepts of God.
Other schools continue to consider themselves as fundamentally atheistic, in the strong sense of the term. Jainism is also sometimes classified as atheistic since Jains's believe that "In the most basic sense, God is not seen as a person, place or tangible thing, but as the ideal state of an individual soul's existence" .
Confucianism and Taoism are arguably atheistic in the sense that they do not explicitly affirm, nor are they founded upon a faith in, a higher being or beings. However, Confucian writings do have numerous references to 'Heaven,' which denotes a transcendent power, with a personal connotation. Neo Confucian writings, such as that of Chu Hsi, are vague on whether their conception of the Great Ultimate is like a personal deity or not. Also, although the Western translation of the Tao as 'god' in some editions of the Tao te Ching is highly misleading, it is still a matter of debate whether the actual descriptions of the Tao by Lao Zi has theistic or atheistic undertones.
Reasons for atheism
Although not all atheists claim to have a rational justification for their stance, a majority of explicit atheists do assert that their stance has a rational basis, and there are some especially common reasons given by them.
Philosophical reasons
A majority of explicit atheists base their stance on rational or philosophical grounds, arguing that their position is based on logical analysis, and subsequent rejection, of theistic claims. These arguments against the existence of deities consist of a number of different problems with theism. Chief among these problems is a perceived lack of evidence supporting theistic claims.
blockquote"Within the framework of scientific rationalism one arrives at the belief in the nonexistence of God, not because of certain knowledge, but because of a sliding scale of methods. At one extreme, we can confidently rebut the personal Gods of creationists on firm empirical grounds: science is sufficient to conclude beyond reasonable doubt that there never was a worldwide flood and that the evolutionary sequence of the Cosmos does not follow either of the two versions of Genesis. The more we move toward a deistic and fuzzily defined God, however, the more scientific rationalism reaches into its toolbox and shifts from empirical science to logical philosophy informed by science. Ultimately, the most convincing arguments against a deistic God are Hume's dictum and Occam's razor. These are philosophical arguments, but they also constitute the bedrock of all of science, and cannot therefore be dismissed as non scientific. The reason we put our trust in these two principles is because their application in the empirical sciences has led to such spectacular successes throughout the last three centuries." blockquote
Many atheists hold that as their view is merely the absence of a certain belief, the only defense that atheism needs is a good offense. If theism's arguments are refuted, nontheism, as the only alternative, becomes the default position. As such, many atheists have argued against the most famous "proofs" of God's existence for centuries. Whether all of the theistic arguments have been refuted is a matter in dispute.
blockquote"Throughout the centuries, theistic philosophers have offered logical arguments in support of God's existence. Most of these can be divided into four major classes ontological, cosmological, teleological, and moral" blockquote
In general, atheists contend that these have been refuted.
There are also many atheists who attack specific forms of theism as being self contradictory. One of the most common arguments against the existence of a specific God is the problem of evil.
blockquote"The problem of evil is probably the most enduring and the most potent argument atheism has to offer against many varieties of theism. Christian apologist William Lane Craig aptly styled it ''atheism's killer argument''. In brief, it seeks to establish that the existence of evil in the world is logically incompatible with the existence of a benevolent God, and that it is more reasonable to conclude that God does not exist than that he does exist but does nothing to stop evil." blockquote
Other well known positive arguments include theological noncognitivism, incoherency arguments (which seek to prove contradictions within the nature of "god"), atheistic teleological arguments, and the Transcendental argument for the non existence of God.
Personal and social reasons
As well as atheists with philosophical reasons, there are explicit atheists who cite social, psychological, practical, and other reasons for their beliefs.
Some people hold atheistic beliefs on the grounds that it is conducive towards living a better life, such as the belief that atheism is more ethical or useful than theism. Such atheists may hold that searching for explanations through natural science is more beneficial than doing it through faith.
Moral reasons for atheism include "cases where the requirement to do what is right favors being an atheist, or at the very least, not supporting certain sects or practices of theism.'''...''' Those who cannot accept the notion of an evil god must conclude that any immoral religion is necessarily false." Practical reasons for atheism include "reasons why accepting atheism over theism produces positive overall effects on a person's life."
Arguments that theism promotes immorality often center around the contention that a great deal of violence, including war, has been brought about by religious beliefs and practices.
Some people are atheists at least partly because of growing up in an environment where atheism is relatively common, such as being raised by atheist parents.
blockquote"Many people are atheists not because they've reasoned things out like that, but because of the way they were brought up or educated, or because they have simply adopted the beliefs of the culture in which they grew up." . blockquote
Most atheists contend that the same is true for many believers. For instance, most of the population in predominantly Jewish, Muslim, or Christian countries follow the religion that is more prevalent without much questioning. ! Cyclic logic. "More people believe in Christianity in places where more people believe in Christianity."
Christian psychologist Paul Vitz (1999) argues that, "Many people have psychological reasons for atheism" . See Vitz (1999) and, for a similar view, Rizzuto (1998).
While it is common to point out the psychological reasons for not being an atheist, it is important to note that emotion and "feelings" play an important role for many people, not just theists. However, an understanding of the psychological origins for belief in a god may contribute to some atheists' lack of religious belief see true believer syndrome and psychology of religion.
Historical reasons
Without even taking into account scientific research, some atheists have come to the conclusion that the existence of one or more gods can be dismissed due to historical reasons. Looking at very old civilizations such as Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome, people believed in multiple gods, linking each of them to an unexplained physical reality, such as Hades the god of the dead, Helios the god of the sun, Zeus the god of thunder and Poseidon the god of earthquakes. These people could not explain a phenomenon using a scientific theory and thus invented a god to explain it, from fear of the unexplained.
In our current times, all of these things, except one, have been explained scientifically. There are no significant group of people believing earthquakes are the direct action of a god shaking the Earth. The only item from the original gods that is still a near complete mystery is death, and as such only one god remains in most modern religions, and looking at the various religions, death (along with afterlife) is usually a central topic.
Looking at historical records, one can also see how the fears that people have of unexplained phenomenons have been used by various religious leaders both to persecute other religions, and to gain more believers. It seems likely to some atheists, that if the result of death could someday be explained beyond a reasonable doubt by science, the last god would no longer be worshiped by a majority of people, just as was the case for every previous mythical god.
Criticisms of atheism
Atheists and atheism have received much criticism and opposition, chiefly from theistic sources, throughout human history. Opponents of atheism have frequently associated atheism with immorality and evil, often characterizing it as a willful and malicious rejection of gods. This, in fact, is the original definition and sense of the word, but changing sensibilities and the normalization of nonreligious viewpoints have caused the term to lose its negative connotations, at least in secular cultures.
The most direct arguments against atheism are those in favor of the existence of deities, which would imply that atheism is simply untrue. For examples of this type of argument, see Existence of God.
Many common criticisms of atheism are rooted in a misunderstanding of what it is, or an incorrect assumption that all atheists are "strong" atheists who assert that there is no such thing as God anywhere in the universe. Ray Comfort exhibits this fallacy in "The Atheist Test" : ''"To say 'There is no God,' and to be correct in the statement, I must be omniscient. I must know how many hairs are upon every head, every thought of every human heart, every detail of history, every atom within every rock...nothing is hidden from my eyes...I know the intimate details of the secret love life of the fleas on the back of the black cat of Napoleon's great grandmother. To make the absolute statement 'There is no God.' I must have absolute knowledge that there isn't one.""
Other criticisms of atheism are based in conceptions that it leads to poor morals or ethics, that it is impossible for a person to truly have faith in nothing, or that lack of belief in a god is as much (or more) a leap of faith than belief in a god. These criticisms have been answered to the satisfaction of many atheists.
See also
List of atheists
Strong atheism
Weak atheism
Related concepts
Brights
Criticism of Religion
Existence of God, Pascal's Wager
Faith and rationality, Religiousness and intelligence
Freethinking
Irreligion
Nihilism
Objectivism
Pantheism
Rationalism
Religious freedom freedom of religion ''and'' belief
Scientific skepticism
Secular Humanism
Secularism
Organizations
Camp Quest
American Atheists
Atheist Foundation of Australia
Freedom From Religion Foundation
Rationalist International
Internet Infidels
Fellowship of Reason
Society of the Godless
Satire
Apatheism
Evil Atheist Conspiracy
Flying Spaghetti Monster
Invisible Pink Unicorn
External links
Web sites
Associations
Web communities
Discuss atheism.
Internet radios
Internet Radio Station
Miscellaneous
by Atheists of Silicon Valley
http: www.qsmithwmu.com (Web site of Quentin Smith, atheist philosopher)
http: www.abstractatom.com (Web site of Jeffrey Grupp, atheist philosopher)
Articles
History of
History of atheistic thought going back to the 1500s
Definitions
brief discussion of polemical usage
by John Smart for Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
from Atheist Foundation of Australia Inc
from Positive Atheism Magazine
Defence
by Sam Harris
the source of the famous " religion is the opiate of the masses", by Karl Marx
by Erkki Hartikainen in The Finnish Society for Natural Philosophy, 2003
by Emma Goldman (''Mother Earth'', 1916)
by Sam Harris
Criticism
by Alister McGrath, Christianity Today, March 2005.
by Alvin Plantinga
by Alvin Plantinga
Statistics
atheism worldwide, by Phil Zuckerman
References
Altizer, Thomas J.J. (1967). ''The Gospel of Christian Atheism.'' London: Collins.
Armstrong, Karen (1999). ''A History of God.'' London: Vintage. ISBN 0099273675
Ayer, A. J. (1966). ''What I Believe.'' '''in''' ''Humanist'', Vol 81 (8) August 1966, p.226 228.
Baggini, Julian (2003). ''Atheism: A very short introduction.'' Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192804243.
Berman, David (1990). ''A History of Atheism in Britain: from Hobbes to Russell.'' London: Routledge. ISBN 0415047277.
Berman, David (1983). ''David Hume and the Suppression of Atheism.'' '''in''' ''Journal of the History of Philosophy'', Vol. 21 (3), July 1983, p.375 387.
Berman, David (1982). ''The Repressive Denials of Atheism in Britain in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries'' '''in''' ''Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy'', Vol. 82c, (9), p.211 246.
Borne, tienne (1961). ''Atheism.'' New York: Hawthorn Books. Originally published in France under the title ''Dieu n est pas mort: essai sur l atheisme contemporain.'' Librairie Arth me Fayard, 1959
Bradlaugh Bonner, Hypatia (1908). ''Charles Bradlaugh: a record of his life and work.'' London: T. Fisher Unwin.
Buckley, M. J. (1987). ''At the origins of modern atheism.'' New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cudworth, Ralph (1678). ''The True Intellectual System of the Universe: the first part, wherein all the reason and philosophy of atheism is confuted and its impossibility demonstrated''.
d'Holbach, P. H. T. (1772). ''Good Sense.''
d'Holbach, P. H. T. (1770). ''The system of nature.'' Electronic versions:
de Mornay, Phillipe (1587). ''A woorke concerning the Trewnesse of the Christian Religion, written in French Against Atheists, Epicures, Paynims, Iewes, Mahumetists''. London.
Drachmann, A. B. (1922). ''Atheism in Pagan Antiquity''. Chicago: Ares Publishers, 1977 ("an unchanged reprint of the 1922 edition"). ISBN 0890052018.
Everitt, Nicholas (2004). ''The Non existence of God: An Introduction.'' London: Routledge. ISBN 0415301076.
Flew, Antony (1966). ''God and Philosophy.'' London: Hutchinson Co.
Flew, Antony (1984a). ''God, Freedom, and Immortality: A Critical Analysis.'' Buffalo, NY: Prometheus. ISBN 0879751274.
Flew, Antony (1984b). ''The Presumption of Atheism''. New York: Prometheus.
Flew, Antony (1972). ''The Presumption of Atheism''. '''in''' ''Canadian Journal of Philosophy'', 2, p.29 46 reprinted in Flew 1984a and 1984b above
Flint, Robert (1877). ''Anti Theistic Theories: Being the Baird Lecture for 1877.'' London: William Blackwood and Sons. 5th ed, 1894.
Gaskin, J.C.A. (ed) (1989). ''Varieties of Unbelief: from Epicurus to Sartre.'' New York: Macmillan. ISBN 002340681X.
Harbour, Daniel (2001). ''An Intelligent Person's Guide to Atheism.'' London: Duckworth. ISBN 0715632299.
Hitchens, Christopher (2001). ''''. New York: Basic Books.
Krueger, D. E. (1998). ''What is atheism?: A short introduction.'' New York: Prometheus. ISBN 1573922145.
Le Poidevin, R. (1996). ''Arguing for atheism: An introduction to the philosophy of religion.'' London: Routledge. ISBN 0415093384.
Levin, S. (1995). ''Jewish Atheism.'' '''in''' ''New Humanist'', Vol 110 (2) May 1995, p.13 15.
Lyas, Colin (1970). ''On the Coherence of Christian Atheism.'' '''in''' ''Philosophy: the Journal of the Royal Institute of Philosophy.'' Vol. 45 (171), January 1970. pp.1 19.
Mackie, J. L. (1982). ''The Miracle of Theism: Arguments for and against the existence of God.'' Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 019824682X.
Maritain, Jacques (1953). ''The Range of Reason.'' London: Geoffrey Bles.
Note: Chapter 8, ''The Meaning of Contemporary Atheism'' (p.103 117, ) is reprinted from ''Review of Politics'', Vol. 11 (3) July 1949, p. 267 280 . A version also appears ''The Listener'', Vol. 43 No.1102, 9 March 1950. pp.427 429,432.
Martin, Michael (1990). ''Atheism: A philosophical justification.'' Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. ISBN 0877229430.
Martin, Michael, Monnier, R. (Eds.) (2003). ''The impossibility of God.'' New York: Prometheus.
McGrath, A. (2005). ''The Twilight of Atheism : The Rise and Fall of Disbelief in the Modern World''. ISBN 0385500629
McTaggart, John McTaggart, Ellis (1927). ''The Nature of Existence.'' Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McTaggart, John McTaggart, Ellis (1930). ''Some Dogmas of Religion.'' London: Edward Arnold Co., new edition. First published 1906
Mills, D. (2004). ''Atheist Universe'', Xlibris, ISBN 1413434819.
M ller, F. Max (1889). ''Natural Religion: The Gifford Lectures, 1888.'' London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Nagel, Ernest (1965). ''A Defence of Atheism.'' '''in''' Edwards, Paul and Pap, Arthur (eds), ''A Modern Introduction to Philosophy: readings from classical and contemporary sources.'' New York: Free Press. Rev ed. pp.460 472.
Nielsen, Kai (1985). ''Philosophy and Atheism.'' New York: Prometheus. ISBN 0879752890.
Nielsen, Kai (2001). ''Naturalism and religion.'' New York: Prometheus.
Reid, J.P. (1967). ''Atheism.'' '''in''' ''New Catholic Encyclopedia''. New York: McGraw Hill. p.1000 1003.
Rizzuto, Ana Maria (1998). ''Why did Freud reject God?: A psychoanalytic interpretation.'' Yale University Press. ISBN 0300075251.
Robinson, Richard (1964). ''An Atheist's Values.'' Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sharpe, R.A. (1997). ''The Moral Case Against Religious Belief.'' London: SCM Press. ISBN 0334026806.
Smith, George H. (1990). ''Atheism, Ayn Rand, and Other Heresies''. New York: Prometheus.
Smith, George H. (1979). ''Atheism: The Case Against God''. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus. ISBN 087975124X.
Sobel, Jordan H. (2004). ''Logic and theism: Arguments for and against beliefs in God.'' Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stenger, Victor J. (2003). ''Has science found God?.'' New York: Prometheus.
Stein, G. (Ed.) (1984). ''The Encyclopaedia of Unbelief'' (Vols. 1 2). New York: Prometheus. ISBN 0879753072.
Thrower, James (1971). ''A Short History of Western Atheism.'' London: Pemberton. ISBN 0301711011.
Vitz, Paul (1999). ''Faith of the fatherless: the psychology of atheism.'' Dallas, Texas: Spence. ISBN 1890626120.
Category:Atheism
Category:Philosophy of religion
af:Ate sme
ar:
fa:
be:
bg:
bn:
br:Ateism
bs:Ateizam
ca:Ateisme
cs:Ateismus
da:Ateisme
de:Atheismus
eo:Ateismo
es:Ate smo
fi:Ateismi
fr:Ath isme
he:
hu:Ateizmus
ia:Atheismo
id:Atheisme
it:Ateismo
ja:
jv:Ateisme
ko:
lb:Atheismus
li:Athe sme
lt:Ateizmas
lv:Ateisms
ms:Atheis
mt:Atei mu
nl:Athe sme
no:Ateisme
pl:Ateizm
pt:Ate smo
ro:Ateism
ru:
simple:Atheism
sk:Ateizmus
sr:
sv:Ateism
uk:
yi:
zh:
'''Agnosticism''' is the philosophical view that the truth or falsity of certain claims particularly theological claims regarding the existence of God or gods is unknown, unknowable, or incoherent. Some agnostics infer from this that these claims are irrelevant to life.
The term and the related ''agnostic'' were coined by Thomas Henry Huxley in 1869, and are also used to describe those who are unconvinced or noncommittal about the existence of deities as well as other matters of religion. The word agnostic comes from the Greek ''a'' (without) and ''gnosis'' (knowledge). Agnosticism, focusing on what can be known, is an epistemological position (dealing with the nature and limits of human knowledge) while atheism and theism are ontological positions (a branch of metaphysics that deals with what types of entities exist). Agnosticism is not to be confused with a view specifically opposing the doctrine of gnosis and Gnosticismthese are religious concepts that are not generally related to agnosticism.
Agnosticism is distinct from strong atheism (also called ''positive atheism'' or ''dogmatic atheism''), which denies the existence of any deities. However, the more general variety of atheism, weak atheism (also called ''negative atheism'', and sometimes ''neutral atheism''), professes only a lack of belief in a god or gods, which is not equivalent to but is compatible with agnosticism. ''Critical atheism'' admits that a god or gods are meaningful concepts but the evidence for them is not in hand, so a default position of not believing in them must be taken in the interim.
Agnostics may claim that it isn't possible to have ''absolute'' or ''certain'' spiritual knowledge or, alternatively, that while certainty ''may'' be possible, they personally have no such knowledge. In both cases, agnosticism involves some form of skepticism towards religious statements. This is different from the simple irreligion of those who give no thought to the subject.
Variations
Agnosticism has suffered more than most expressions of philosophical position from terminological vagaries. Data collection services often display the common use of the term, distinct from strong atheism in its lack of disputing the existence of deities. Agnostics are listed alongside secular, non religious, or other such categories.
Other variations include:
Strong agnosticism (also called hard agnosticism, closed agnosticism, strict agnosticism, absolute agnosticism) the view that the question of the existence of deities is unknowable by nature or that human beings are ill equipped to judge the evidence.
Weak agnosticism (also called soft agnosticism, open agnosticism, empirical agnosticism, temporal agnosticism) the view that the existence or nonexistence of God or gods is currently unknown but isn't necessarily unknowable, therefore one will withhold judgment until more evidence is available.
Apathetic agnosticism the view that there is no proof either of God's existence or nonexistence, but since God (if there is one) appears unconcerned for the universe or the welfare of its inhabitants, the question is largely academic.
Ignosticism the view that the concept of God as a being is meaningless because it has no verifiable consequences, therefore it cannot be usefully discussed as having existence or nonexistence. See scientific method.
Model agnosticism the view that philosophical and metaphysical questions are not ultimately verifiable but that a model of malleable assumption should be built upon rational thought. This branch of agnosticism does not focus on a deity's existence.
Agnostic theism the view of those who do not claim to ''know'' God's existence, but still ''believe'' in his existence. (''See Knowledge Vs Beliefs'') Whether this is truly agnosticism is disputed. It may also imply the belief that although there is something that resembles (or would at least appear to us as) a god (or gods,) there remains doubt over their true nature, motives, or the validity of the claim to be 'God' rather than superior, supernatural being(s).
Agnostic spiritualism the view that there may or may not be a god (or gods,) while maintaining a general personal belief in a spiritual aspect of reality, particularly without distinct religious basis, or adherence to any established doctrine or dogma.
Agnostic atheism the view that God may or may not exist, but that his non existence is more likely. Some agnostic atheists would at least partially base their beliefs on Occam's Razor.
Some philosophical opinions
Among the most famous agnostics (in the original sense) have been Robert G. Ingersoll, Thomas Henry Huxley, and Charles Darwin. Some have argued from the works of David Hume, especially ''Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion'', that he was an agnostic, but this remains subject to debate.
Thomas Henry Huxley
Agnostic views are as old as philosophical skepticism, but the terms agnostic and agnosticism were created by Huxley to sum up his thoughts on contemporary developments of metaphysics about the "unconditioned" (Hamilton) and the "unknowable" (Herbert Spencer). It is important, therefore, to discover Huxley's own views on the matter. Though Huxley began to use the term "agnostic" in 1869, his opinions had taken shape some time before that date. In a letter of September 23, 1860, to Charles Kingsley, Huxley discussed his views extensively:
:I neither affirm nor deny the immortality of man. I see no reason for believing it, but, on the other hand, I have no means of disproving it. I have no ''a priori'' objections to the doctrine. No man who has to deal daily and hourly with nature can trouble himself about ''a priori'' difficulties. Give me such evidence as would justify me in believing in anything else, and I will believe that. Why should I not? It is not half so wonderful as the conservation of force or the indestructibility of matter. . . .
:It is no use to talk to me of analogies and probabilities. I know what I mean when I say I believe in the law of the inverse squares, and I will not rest my life and my hopes upon weaker convictions. . . .
:That my personality is the surest thing I know may be true. But the attempt to conceive what it is leads me into mere verbal subtleties. I have champed up all that chaff about the ego and the non ego, noumena and phenomena, and all the rest of it, too often not to know that in attempting even to think of these questions, the human intellect flounders at once out of its depth.
And again, to the same correspondent, May 6, 1863:
:I have never had the least sympathy with the ''a priori'' reasons against orthodoxy, and I have by nature and disposition the greatest possible antipathy to all the atheistic and infidel school. Nevertheless I know that I am, in spite of myself, exactly what the Christian would call, and, so far as I can see, is justified in calling, atheist and infidel. I cannot see one shadow or tittle of evidence that the great unknown underlying the phenomenon of the universe stands to us in the relation of a Father who loves us and cares for us as Christianity asserts. So with regard to the other great Christian dogmas, immortality of soul and future state of rewards and punishments, what possible objection can Iwho am compelled perforce to believe in the immortality of what we call Matter and Force, and in a very unmistakable present state of rewards and punishments for our deedshave to these doctrines? Give me a scintilla of evidence, and I am ready to jump at them.
Of the origin of the name agnostic to describe this attitude, Huxley gave (Coll. Ess. v. pp. 237 239) the following account:
:So I took thought, and invented what I conceived to be the appropriate title of "agnostic." It came into my head as suggestively antithetic to the "gnostic" of Church history, who professed to know so much about the very things of which I was ignorant. To my great satisfaction the term took.
Huxley's agnosticism is believed to be a natural consequence of the intellectual and philosophical conditions of the 1860s, when clerical intolerance was trying to suppress scientific discoveries which appeared to clash with a literal reading of the Book of Genesis and other established Jewish and Christian doctrines. Agnosticism should not, however, be confused with natural theology, deism, pantheism, or other science positive forms of theism.
By way of clarification, Huxley states, "In matters of the intellect, follow your reason as far as it will take you, without regard to any other consideration. And negatively: In matters of the intellect, do not pretend that conclusions are certain which are not demonstrated or demonstrable" (Huxley, ''Agnosticism'', 1889). While A. W. Momerie has noted that this is nothing but a definition of honesty, Huxley's usual definition goes beyond mere honesty to insist that these metaphysical issues are fundamentally unknowable.
Bertrand Russell
Bertrand Russell's pamphlet, ''Why I Am Not a Christian,'' based on a speech delivered in 1927 and later included in a book of the same title, is considered a classic statement of agnosticism. The essay briefly lays out Russells objections to some of the arguments for the existence of God before discussing his moral objections to Christian teachings. He then calls upon his readers to "stand on their own two feet and look fair and square at the world," with a "fearless attitude and a free intelligence."
In 1939, Russell gave a lecture on ''The existence and nature of God'', in which he characterised himself as an agnostic. He said:
:The existence and nature of God is a subject of which I can discuss only half. If one arrives at a negative conclusion concerning the first part of the question, the second part of the question does not arise and my position, as you may have gathered, is a negative one on this matter. (Collected Papers, Vol 10, p.255)
However, later in the same lecture, discussing modern non anthropomorphic concepts of God, Russell states:
:That sort of God is, I think, not one that can actually be disproved, as I think the omnipotent and benevolent creator can. (p.258)
In Russell's 1947 pamphlet, ''Am I An Atheist Or An Agnostic?'' (subtitled ''A Plea For Tolerance In The Face Of New Dogmas''), he ruminates on the problem of what to call himself:
:As a philosopher, if I were speaking to a purely philosophic audience I should say that I ought to describe myself as an Agnostic, because I do not think that there is a conclusive argument by which one prove that there is not a God.
:On the other hand, if I am to convey the right impression to the ordinary man in the street I think I ought to say that I am an Atheist, because when I say that I cannot prove that there is not a God, I ought to add equally that I cannot prove that there are not the Homeric gods.
In his 1953 essay, ''What Is An Agnostic?'' Russell states:
:An agnostic thinks it impossible to know the truth in matters such as God and the future life with which Christianity and other religions are concerned. Or, if not impossible, at least impossible at the present time.
However, later in the essay, Russell says:
:I think that if I heard a voice from the sky predicting all that was going to happen to me during the next twenty four hours, including events that would have seemed highly improbable, and if all these events then produced to happen, I might perhaps be convinced at least of the existence of some superhuman intelligence.
He didn't say "supreme" or "supernatural" intelligence: these terms are metaphysically loaded.
For Russell, then, agnosticism doesn't necessarily assert that it is ''in principle'' impossible to know whether or not there is a God. Moreover, "An Agnostic may think the Christian God as improbable as the Olympians in that case, he is, for practical purposes, at one with the atheists."
Logical positivism
Logical positivists, such as Rudolph Carnap and A. J. Ayer, are sometimes thought to be agnostic. Using arguments reminiscent of Wittgensteins famous "Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent," they viewed any talk of god(s) as literally nonsense. For the logical positivists and adherents of similar schools of thought, statements about religious or other transcendent experiences could not have a truth value and were deemed to be without meaning. But this includes all utterances about
god(s), ''even'' those agnostic statements that deny knowledge of God(s) are possible. In ''Language, Truth and Logic'' Ayer explicitly rejects agnosticism on the grounds that an agnostic, despite claiming that knowledge of god(s) are not possible, nevertheless holds that statements about god(s) have meaning. This position, however, is valid only in the case of agnostics who define their agnosticism in this fashion. ''Ignostics'' define agnosticism in a manner consistent with the logical positivist view, holding theism to be ''incoherent.''
References
''Collected Essays'', Thomas Huxley, ISBN 1855069229
''Man's Place In Nature'', Thomas Huxley, ISBN 037575847X
''Why I Am Not a Christian'', Bertrand Russell, ISBN 0671203231
''Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion'', David Hume, ISBN 0140445366
''Language, Truth, and Logic'', A.J. Ayer, ISBN 0486200108
See also
List of agnostics
Religious freedom
External links
by Bertrand Russell, 1953 .
Agnosticism
by T. H. Huxley
ar:
bg:
ca:Agnosticisme
cs:Agnosticismus
da:Agnosticisme
de:Agnostizismus
et:Agnostitsism
el:
es:Agnosticismo
eo:Agnostikismo
fr:Agnosticisme
gd:Adhbharachais
id:Agnostisisme
ia:Agnosticismo
it:Agnosticismo
he:
jv:Agnostisisme
ka:
lb:Agnostizismus
hu:Agnoszticizmus
nl:Agnosticisme
ja:
no:Agnostisisme
pl:Agnostycyzm
pt:Agnosticismo
ro:Agnosticism
ru:
sh:Agnosticizam
simple:Agnosticism
sl:Agnosticizem
sr:
fi:Agnostismi
sv:Agnosticism
tr:Agnostisizm
zh:
'''Argon''' is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol '''Ar''' and atomic number 18. The third noble gas, in group 18, argon makes up about 1 of the Earth's atmosphere, making it the most common noble gas on Earth.
Notable characteristics
Argon is 2.5 times as soluble in water as nitrogen which is approximately the same solubility as oxygen. This highly stable chemical element is colorless and odorless in both its liquid and gaseous forms.
There are few known true chemical compounds that contain argon, which is one of the reasons it was formerly called an inert gas. The creation of argon hydrofluoride (HArF), a highly unstable compound of argon with fluorine, was reported by researchers at the University of Helsinki in 2000, but has not been confirmed as of yet.
Although no ''chemical'' compounds of argon are presently confirmed, argon can form clathrates with water when atoms of it are trapped in a lattice of the water molecules. Theoretical calculations on computers have shown several Argon compounds that should be stable but for which no synthesis routes are currently known.
Applications
It is used in lighting since it will not react with the filament in a lightbulb even under high temperatures and other cases where diatomic nitrogen is an unsuitable (semi )inert gas. Other uses
Argon is used as an inert gas shield in many forms of welding, including mig and tig (where the "'''I'''" stands for inert).
as a non reactive blanket in the manufacture of titanium and other reactive elements.
as a protective atmosphere for growing silicon and germanium crystals.
as a gas for use in plasma globes.
as a gas for use in energy efficient windows.
Argon 39 has been used for a number of applications, primarily ice coring. It has also been used for ground water dating.
Cryosurgery procedures such as cryoablation uses liquefied argon to destroy cancer cells.
Argon is also used in technical SCUBA diving to inflate the dry suit, because it is inert and has low thermal conductivity.
History
Argon (Greek ''argos'' meaning "inactive") was suspected to be present in air by Henry Cavendish in 1785 but was not discovered until 1894 by Lord Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay.
Occurrence
This gas is isolated through liquid air fractionation since the atmosphere contains only 0.934 volume of argon (1.29 mass). The Martian atmosphere in contrast contains 1.6 of Ar 40 and 5 ppm Ar 36. In 2005, the ''Huygens'' probe also discovered the presence of Ar 40 on Titan, the largest moon of Saturn .
Compounds
Before 1962, argon and the other noble gases were generally considered to be chemically inert and not able to form compounds. However, since then, scientists have been able to force the heavier noble gases to form compounds. In 2000, the first argon compounds were formed by researchers at the University of Helsinki. By shining ultraviolet light onto frozen argon containing a small amount of hydrogen fluoride, they were able to form argon hydrofluoride (HArF): see http: pubs.acs.org cen 80th noblegases.html in its paragraph starting "''Many recent findings''". It is stable up to 40 K.
Isotopes
The main isotopes of argon found on Earth are Ar 40, Ar 36, and Ar 38. Naturally occurring K 40 with a half life of 1.250 x 10sup9 sup years, decays to stable Ar 40 (11.2 ) by electron capture and by positron emission, and also transforms to stable Ca 40 (88.8 ) via beta decay. These properties and ratios are used to determine the age of rocks.
In the Earth's atmosphere, Ar 39 is made by cosmic ray activity, primarily with Ar 40. In the subsurface environment, it is also produced through neutron capture by K 39 or alpha emission by calcium. Argon 37 is created from the decay of calcium 40 as a result of subsurface nuclear explosions. It has a half life of 35 days.
References
External links
Diving applications:
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Noble gases
af:Argon
ar: ( )
bg:
bs:Argon
ca:Arg
cs:Argon
cy:Argon
da:Argon
de:Argon
et:Argoon
es:Arg n
eo:Argono
fr:Argon
ko:
hr:Argon
io:Argono
id:Argon
is:Argon
it:Argon
he: ( )
lv:Argons
lt:Argonas
hu:Argon
mi:Argon
ms:Argon
nl:Argon
ja:
no:Argon
nn:Argon
oc:Argon
pl:Argon
pt:Argon
ru:
sh:Argon
simple:Argon
sl:Argon
sr:
fi:Argon
sv:Argon
th:
uk:
vi:Agon
zh:
'''Arsenic''' is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol '''As''' and atomic number 33. This is a notoriously poisonous metalloid that has three allotropic forms yellow, black and grey. Arsenic and its compounds are used as pesticides, herbicides, insecticides and various alloys.
Notable characteristics
Arsenic is very similar chemically to its predecessor phosphorus, so much so that it will partly substitute for phosphorus in biochemical reactions and is thus poisonous. When heated it rapidly oxidizes to arsenic trioxide, which has a garlic odor. Arsenic and some arsenic compounds can also sublime upon heating, converting directly to a gaseous form. Elemental arsenic is found in two solid forms: yellow and gray metallic, with specific gravities of 1.97 and 5.73, respectively.
Applications
Lead hydrogen arsenate has been used, well into the 20th century, as an insecticide on fruit trees (resulting in neurological damage to those working the sprayers), and Scheele's Green has even been recorded in the 19th century as a coloring agent in sweets. In the last half century, monosodium methyl arsenate (MSMA), a less toxic organic form of arsenic, has replaced lead arsenate's role in agriculture.
The application of most concern to the general public is probably that of wood which has been treated with chromated copper arsenate ("CCA", or "Tanalith", and the vast majority of older "pressure treated" wood). CCA timber is still in widespread use in many countries, and was heavily used during the latter half of the 20th century as a structural, and outdoor building material, where there was a risk of rot, or insect infestation in untreated timber. Although widespread bans followed the publication of studies which showed low level leaching from in situ timbers (such as children's playground equipment) into surrounding soil, the most serious risk is presented by the burning of CCA timber. Recent years have seen fatal animal poisonings, and serious human poisonings resulting from the ingestion directly or indirectly of wood ash from CCA timber (the lethal human dose is approximately 20 grams of ash roughly a tablespoon). Scrap CCA construction timber continues to be widely burnt through ignorance, in both commercial, and domestic fires. Safe disposal of CCA timber remains patchy, and little practiced, there is concern in some quarters about the widespread landfill disposal of such timber.
During the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries, a number of arsenic compounds have been used as medicines, including arsphenamine (by Paul Ehrlich) and arsenic trioxide (by Thomas Fowler).
Arsphenamine as well as Neosalvarsan was indicated for syphilis and trypanosomiasis, but has been superseded by modern antibiotics.
Arsenic trioxide has been used in a variety of ways over the past 200 years, but most commonly in the treatment of cancer. The FDA in 2000 approved this compound for the treatment of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia that is resistant to ATRA.
But arsenic isn't always good for cancer. Some studies show that if you use arsenic you have a high risk for cancer.
Copper acetoarsenite was used as a green pigment known under many different names, including Paris Green and Emerald Green. It caused numerous arsenic poisonings.
Other uses
Various agricultural insecticides and poisons.
Gallium arsenide is an important semiconductor material, used in integrated circuits. Circuits made using the compound are much faster (but also much more expensive) than those made in silicon. Unlike silicon it is direct bandgap, and so can be used in laser diodes and LEDs to directly convert electricity into light.
Arsenic trioxide is used in Australia for treating termite infestations in houses.
Also used in bronzing and pyrotechny.
History
The word ''arsenic'' is borrowed from the Persian word ''Zarnikh'' meaning "yellow orpiment". ''Zarnikh'' was borrowed by Greek as ''arsenikon''. Arsenic has been known and used in Persia and elsewhere since ancient times. As the symptoms of arsenic poisoning were somewhat ill defined, it was frequently used for murder until the advent of the Marsh test, a sensitive chemical test for its presence. (Another less sensitive but more general test is the Reinsch test.) Due to its use by the ruling class to bump each other off and its incredible potency and discreetness, arsenic has been called the ''Poison of Kings and the King of Poisons''.
During the Bronze Age, arsenic was often included in the bronze (mostly as an impurity), which made the alloy harder.
Albertus Magnus is believed to have been the first to isolate the
element in 1250. In 1649 Johann Schroeder published two ways of preparing arsenic.
75px right Alchemical symbol for arsenicThe alchemical symbol for arsenic is shown opposite.
In Victorian times, arsenic was mixed with vinegar and chalk and eaten by women to improve the complexion of their faces, making their skin more fair to show they did not work in the fields. Arsenic was also rubbed into the faces and arms of women to improve their complexion.
There is a massive epidemic of arsenic poisoning in Bangladesh, where it is estimated that approximately 57 million people are drinking groundwater with arsenic concentrations elevated above the World Health Organization's standard of 50 parts per billion. The arsenic in the groundwater is of natural origin, and is released from the sediment into the groundwater due to the anoxic conditions of the subsurface. This groundwater began to be used after western NGOs instigated a massive tube well drinking water program in the late twentieth century. This program was designed to prevent drinking of bacterially contaminated surface waters, but unfortunately failed to test for arsenic in the groundwater.(2) Many other countries in South East Asia, such as Vietnam, Cambodia, and Tibet, are thought to have geological environments similarly conducive to generation of high arsenic groundwaters.
Occurrence
Arsenopyrite also called mispickel (FeSAs) is the most common mineral from which, on heating, the arsenic sublimes leaving ferrous sulfide. Other arsenic minerals include realgar, mimetite, cobaltite and erythrite.
The most important compounds of arsenic are white arsenic, its sulfide, Paris Green, calcium arsenate, and lead hydrogen arsenate. Paris Green, calcium arsenate, and lead arsenate have been used as agricultural insecticides and poisons. It is sometimes found native, but usually combined with silver, cobalt, nickel, iron, antimony, or sulfur.
In addition to the inorganic forms mentioned above, arsenic also occurs in various organic forms in the environment. Inorganic arsenic and its compounds, upon entering the food chain, are progressively metabolised to a less toxic form of arsenic through a process of methylation.
Precautions
Arsenic and many of its compounds are especially potent poisons. Arsenic kills by allosteric inhibition of the metabolic enzyme lipothiamide pyrophosphate, leading to death from multi system organ failure. See arsenic poisoning. Arsenic and its compounds inhibit the , which is an important enzyme of metabolism. The post mortem reveals brick red colored mucosa, due to severe haemorrhage.
Elemental arsenic and arsenic compounds are classified as '''''toxic''''' and '''''dangerous for the environment''''' in the European Union under directive 67 548 EEC.
! INDEX 033 001 00 X (arsenic) R23 25 50 53 S1 2 20 21 28 45 60 61
! INDEX 033 002 00 5 (other compounds) pareil
The IARC recognizes arsenic and arsenic compounds as group 1 carcinogens, and the EU lists arsenic trioxide, arsenic pentoxide and arsenate salts as category 1 carcinogens.
Growing the Brake (fern) Pteris vittata will remove arsenic from the soil.
See also
Aqua Tofana
Fowler's solution
Arsenicosis
Compounds
Arsenic acid (Hsub3 subAsOsub4 sub)
Arsenous acid (Hsub3 subAsOsub3 sub)
Arsenic trioxide (Assub2 subOsub3 sub)
Arsine (Arsenic Trihydride AsHsub3 sub)
Cadmium arsenide (Cdsub3 subAssub2 sub)
Gallium arsenide (GaAs)
Lead hydrogen arsenate (PbHAsOsub4 sub)
See also :Category:Arsenic compounds
References
Endnotes
Antman, Karen H. (2001). . Introduction to a supplement to ''The Oncologist''. '''6''' (Suppl 2), 1 2. PMID 11331433.
Andrew Meharg, Venomous Earth How Arsenic Caused The World's Worst Mass Poisoning, , 2005.
External links
by the EPA.
by the WHO.
by GreenFacts.
by the IARC.
Category:Metalloids
Category:Pnictogens
category:Toxicology
Category:Chemical elements
ar:
bg:
bs:Arsen
ca:Ars nic
cs:Arsen
cy:Arsenig
da:Arsen
de:Arsen
et:Arseen
es:Ars nico
eo:Arseno
fa:
fr:Arsenic
ko:
io:Arseno
id:Arsenik
is:Arsen
it:Arsenico
he:
lv:Ars ns
lt:Arsenas
hu:Arz n
nl:Arsenicum
ja:
no:Arsen
nn:Arsen
oc:Arsenic
pl:Arsen
pt:Ars nio
ru:
sc:Ars nicu
sl:Arzen
sr:
fi:Arseeni
sv:Arsenik
th:
uk:
zh:
Elementbox isotopes decay mn 125 sym Sb
na syn hl 2.7582 y
dm Betasup sup de 0.767 pn 125 ps Te
'''Antimony''' is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol '''Sb''' (L. ''Stibium'') and atomic number 51. A metalloid, antimony has four allotropic forms. The stable form of antimony is a blue white metal. Yellow and black antimony are unstable non metals. Antimony is used in flame proofing, paints, ceramics, enamels, a wide variety of alloys, electronics, and rubber.
Notable characteristics
Antimony in its elemental form is a silvery white, brittle, fusible, crystalline solid that exhibits poor electrical and heat conductivity properties and vaporizes at low temperatures. A metalloid, antimony resembles a metal in its appearance and physical properties, but does not chemically react as a metal. It is also attacked by oxidizing acids and halogens. Antimony and some of its alloys expand on cooling.
Estimates of the abundance of antimony in the Earth's crust range from 0.2 to 0.5 ppm. Antimony is geochemically categorized as a chalcophile, occurring with sulfur and the heavy metals lead, copper, and silver.
Applications
Antimony is increasingly being used in the semiconductor industry in the production of diodes, infrared detectors, and Hall effect devices. As an alloy, this semi metal greatly increases lead's hardness and mechanical strength. The most important use of antimony metal is as a hardener in lead for storage batteries. Other uses
Batteries,
antifriction alloys,
type metal,
small arms and tracer bullets,
cable sheathing,
matches,
medicines,
plumbing ("lead free" solder contains 5 Sb),
main and big end bearings in internal combustion engines (as alloy).
used in the past to treat Schistosomiasis, nowadays Praziquantel is universally used.
Antimony compounds in the form of oxides, sulfides, sodium antimonate, and antimony trichloride are used in the making of flame proofing compounds, ceramic enamels, glass, paints, and pottery. Antimony trioxide is the most important of the antimony compounds and is primarily used in flame retardant formulations. These flame retardant applications include such markets as children's clothing, toys, aircraft and automobile seat covers. Also, antimony sulfide is one of the ingredients of a modern match.
History
Antimony was recognized in antiquity (3000 BC or earlier) in various compounds, and it was prized for its fine casting qualities. It was first reported scientifically by Tholden in 1450, and was known to be a metal by the beginning of the 17th century. The origin of the name "antimony" is not clear the term may come from the Greek words "anti" and "monos", which approximately means "opposed to solitude" as it was thought never to exist in its pure form, or from the Pharaonic expression "Antos Amun", which could be translated as "bloom of the god Amun".
frame left 80px Alchemical symbol for antimony
The natural sulfide of antimony, stibnite, was known and used in Biblical times as medicine and as a cosmetic. Stibnite is still used in some developing countries as medicine. Antimony has been used for the treatment of schistosomiasis. Antimony attaches itself to sulfur atoms in certain enzymes which are used both by the parasite and human host. Small doses can kill the parasite without causing damage to the patient. Antimony and its compounds are used in several veterinary preparations like Anthiomaline or Lithium antimony thiomalate, which is used as a skin conditioner in ruminants. Antimony has a nourishing or conditioning effect on keratinized tissues, at least in animals. Tartar emetic is another antimony preparation which is used as an anti schistosomal drug.
The relationship between antimony's modern name and its symbol is complex the Coptic name for the cosmetic powder antimony sulfide was borrowed by the Greeks, which was in turn borrowed by Latin, resulting in ''stibium''. The chemical pioneer J ns Jakob Berzelius used an abbreviation of this name for antimony in his writings, and his usage became the standard symbol.
Treatments chiefly involving antimony have been called antimonials.
Sources
products
Even though this element is not abundant, it is found in over 100 mineral species. Antimony is sometimes found native, but more frequently it is found in the sulfide stibnite (Sbsub2 subSsub3 sub) which is the predominant ore mineral. Commercial forms of antimony are generally ingots, broken pieces, granules, and cast cake. Other forms are powder, shot, and single crystals.
border "1"
! Country !! Tonnes !! of total
align "center" People's Republic of China
align "center" 126 000
align "center" 81.5
align "center" Russia
align "center" 12 000
align "center" 7.8
align "center" South Africa
align "center" 5 023
align "center" 3.3
align "center" Tadjikistan
align "center" 3 480
align "center" 2.3
align "center" Bolivia
align "center" 2 430
align "center" 1.6
align "center" ''Top 5''
align "center" ''148 933''
align "center" ''96.4''
align "center" '''Total world'''
align "center" '''154 538'''
align "center" '''100.0'''
small''Chiffres de 2003, m tal contenue dans les minerais et concentr s, source : L' tat du monde 2005'' small
Precautions
Antimony and many of its compounds are toxic. Clinically, antimony poisoning is very similar to arsenic poisoning. In small doses, antimony causes headache, dizziness, and depression. Such small doses have in the past been reported in some acidic fruit drinks. The acidic nature of the drink is sufficient to dissolve small amounts of antimony oxide contained in the packaging of the drink modern manufacturing methods prevent this occurrence. Larger doses cause violent and frequent vomiting, and will lead to death in few days. Very large doses will cause violent vomiting, causing the poison to be expelled from the body before any harm is done.
Compounds
Antimony pentafluoride SbFsub5 sub, Antimony trioxide Sbsub2 subOsub3 sub,
Stibine (Antimony Trihydride SbHsub3 sub), Indium antimonide (InSb)
see also :Category:Antimony compounds
References
See also
antimonial
External links
(by Peter van der Krogt)
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Metalloids
Category:Pnictogens
ar:
bs:Antimon
ca:Antimoni
cs:Antimon
de:Antimon
et:Antimon
es:Antimonio
eo:Antimono
fr:Antimoine
ko:
io:Antimonio
is:Antimon
it:Antimonio
he:
ku:St by m
lv:Antimons
lt:Stibis
lb:Antimon
hu:Antimon
nl:Antimoon
ja:
no:Antimon
nn:Antimon
oc:Antim ni
pl:Antymon
pt:Antim nio
ru:
sk:Antim n (nerast)
sl:Antimon
sr:
fi:Antimoni
sv:Antimon
th:
uk:
zh:
Elementbox isotopes decay mn 225 sym Ac
na syn hl 10 days
dm de 5.935 pn 221 ps Fr
Elementbox isotopes decay3 mn 226 sym Ac
na syn hl 29.37 hours
dm1 sup sup de1 1.117 pn1 226 ps1 Th
dm2 de2 0.640 pn2 226 ps2 Ra
dm3 de3 5.536 pn3 222 ps3 Fr
Elementbox isotopes decay2 mn 227 sym Ac
na 100 hl 21.773 years
dm1 sup sup de1 0.045 pn1 227 ps1 Th
dm2 de2 5.042 pn2 223 ps2 Fr
'''Actinium''' is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ac and atomic number 89.
Notable characteristics
Actinium is a silvery radioactive metallic element. Due to its intense radioactivity, Actinium glows in the dark with an eerie blue light. It is found only in traces in uranium ores as 227 Ac, an and emitter with a half life of 21.773 years. One ton of uranium ore contains about a tenth of a gram of actinium.
Applications
It is about 150 times as radioactive as radium, making it valuable as a neutron source. Otherwise it has no significant industrial applications.
Actinium 225 is used in medicine to produce Bi 213 in a reusable generator or can be used alone as an agent for radio immunotherapy.
History
Actinium was discovered in 1899 by Andr Louis Debierne, a French chemist, who separated it from pitchblende. Friedrich Otto Giesel independently discovered actinium in 1902. The chemical behavior of actinium is similar to that of the rare earth lanthanum.
The word actinium comes from the Greek ''aktis, aktinos'', meaning beam or ray.
Occurrence
Actinium is found in trace amounts in uranium ore, but more commonly is made in milligram amounts by the neutron irradiation of 226 Ra in a nuclear reactor. Actinium metal has been prepared by the reduction of actinium fluoride with lithium vapor at about 1100 to 1300 C.
Isotopes
Naturally occurring actinium is composed of 1 radioactive isotope sup227 supAc. 36 radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being 227 Ac with a half life of 21.772 y, 225 Ac with a half life of 10.0 days, and 226 Ac with a half life of 29.37 h. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half lifes that are less than 10 hours and the majority of these have half lifes that are less than 1 minute. The shortest lived isotope of actinium issup217 supAc which decays through alpha decay and electron capture. It has a half life of 69 ns. Actinium also has 2 meta states.
Purified actinium 227 comes into equilibrium with its decay products at the end of 185 days, and then decays according to its 21.773 year half life.
The isotopes of actinium range in atomic weight from 206 amu (sup206 supactinium) to 236 amu (sup236 supAc).
Precautions
Actinium 227 is extremely radioactive, and in terms of its potential for radiation induced health effects, actinium 227 is about as dangerous as plutonium. Ingesting even small amounts of actinium 227 would present a serious health hazard.
References
External links
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Actinides
ar:
ca:Actini
cs:Aktinium
da:Actinium
de:Actinium
et:Aktiinium
es:Actinio
eo:Aktinio
fr:Actinium
he:
hr:Aktinij
ko:
io:Aktiniumo
it:Attinio
la:Actinium
lt:Aktinis
hu:Akt nium
nl:Actinium
ja:
no:Actinium
nn:Actinium
pl:Aktyn
pt:Act nio
ru:
sr:
fi:Aktinium
sv:Aktinium
th:
uk:
zh:
Elementbox isotopes decay2 mn 241 sym Am
na syn hl 432.2 y
dm1 SF de1 pn1 ps1
dm2 de2 5.638 pn2 237 ps2 Np
Elementbox isotopes decay3 mn 242m sym Am
na syn hl 141 y
dm1 IT de1 0.049 pn1 ps1
dm2 de2 5.637 pn2 238 ps2 Np
dm3 SF de3 pn3 ps3
Elementbox isotopes decay2 mn 243 sym Am
na syn hl 7370 y
dm1 SF de1 pn1 ps1
dm2 de2 5.438 pn2 239 ps2 Np
'''Americium''' is a synthetic element in the periodic table that has the symbol Am and atomic number 95. A radioactive metallic element, americium is an actinide that was obtained by bombarding plutonium with neutrons and was the fourth transuranic element to be discovered. It was named for the Americas, by analogy with europium.
Notable characteristics
Freshly prepared americium metal has a white and silvery luster, at room temperatures it slowly tarnishes in dry air. It is more silvery than plutonium or neptunium and apparently more malleable than neptunium or uranium. Alpha emission from Am 241 is approximately three times radium. Gram quantities of Am 241 emit intense gamma rays which creates a serious exposure problem for anyone handling the element.
Applications
This element can be produced in kilogram amounts and has some uses (mostly Am 241 since it is easier to produce relatively pure samples of this isotope). Americium has found its way into the household, where one type of smoke detector contains a tiny amount of Am 241 as a source of ionizing radiation. Am 241 has been used as a portable gamma ray source for use in radiography. The element has also been employed to gauge glass thickness to help create flat glass. Am 242 is a neutron emitter and has found uses in neutron radiography. However this isotope is extremely expensive to produce in usable quantities.
History
Americium was first synthesized by Glenn T. Seaborg, Leon O. Morgan, Ralph A. James, and Albert Ghiorso in late 1944 at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago (now known as Argonne National Laboratory). The team created the isotope Am 241 by subjecting plutonium 239 to successive neutron capture reactions in a nuclear reactor. This created Pu 240 and then Pu 241 which in turn decayed into Am 241 via beta decay. Seaborg was granted patent 3,156,523 for "Element 95 and Method of Producing Said Element". The discovery of americium and curium was first announced informally on a children's quiz show in 1945.
Isotopes
18 radioisotopes of americium have been characterized, with the most stable being Am 243 with a half life of 7370 years, and Am 241 with a half life of 432.2 years. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half lives that are less than 51 hours, and the majority of these have half lives that are less than 100 minutes. This element also has 8 meta states, with the most stable being Am 242m (tsub sub 141 years). The isotopes of americium range in atomic weight from 231.046 amu (Am 231) to 249.078 amu (Am 249).
Chemistry
In aqueous systems the most common oxidation state is 3, it is very much harder to oxidise Am(III) to Am(IV) than it is to do the same oxidation for Pu(III).
Currently the solvent extraction chemistry of americium is important as in several areas of the world scientists are working on reducing the medium term radiotoxicity of the waste from the reprocessing of used nuclear fuel.
See liquid liquid extraction for some examples of the solvent extraction of americium.
Americium like other actinides readily forms a dioxide americyl core (AmOsub2 sub). In the environment, this americyl core readily complexes with carbonate as well as other oxygen moeities (OHsup sup, NOsub2 subsup sup, NOsub3 subsup sup, and SOsub4 subsup 2 sup) to form charged complexes which tend to be readily mobile with low affinities to soil.
AmOsub2 sub(OH)sup 1 sup
AmOsub2 sub(OH)sub2 subsup 2 sup
AmOsub2 sub(COsub3 sub)sub1 subsup 1 sup
AmOsub2 sub(COsub3 sub)sub2 subsup 1 sup
AmOsub2 sub(COsub3 sub)sub3 subsup 3 sup
References
''Guide to the Elements Revised Edition'', Albert Stwertka, (Oxford University Press 1998) ISBN 0 19 508083 1
External links
(also used as a reference)
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Actinides
Category:Americium compounds
ca:Americi
cs:Americium
da:Americium
de:Americium
et:Ameriitsium
el:
es:Americio
eo:Americio
fr:Am ricium
ko:
io:Americio
it:Americio
he:
lt:Americis
lb:Americium
hu:Amer cium
nl:Americium
ja:
nn:Americium
pl:Ameryk
pt:Amer cio
ru:
sr:
fi:Amerikium
sv:Americium
th:
tr:Amerikyum
uk:
zh:
Elementbox isotopes decay2 mn 210 sym At
na 100 hl 8.1 h
dm1 Epsilon de1 3.981 pn1 210 ps1 Po
dm2 Alpha de2 5.631 pn2 206 ps2 Bi
'''Astatine''' is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol '''At''' and atomic number 85. This radioactive element occurs naturally from uranium and thorium decay and is the heaviest of the halogens.
Notable characteristics
This highly radioactive element has been confirmed by mass spectrometers to behave chemically much like other halogens, especially iodine (it would probably accumulate in the thyroid gland like iodine). Astatine is thought to be more metallic than iodine. Researchers at the Brookhaven National Laboratory have performed experiments that have identified and measured elementary reactions that involve astatine.
With the possible exception of francium, astatine is the rarest naturally occurring element with the total amount in Earth's crust estimated to be less than 1 oz (28 g) at any one time this amounts to less than one teaspoon of the element. The Guinness Book of Records, however, has dubbed the element the rarest on Earth, stating: "Only around 0.9 oz (25 g) of the element astatine (At) occurs naturally in the Earth's crust."
History
Astatine (Greek ''astatos'' meaning "unstable") was first synthesized in 1940 by Dale R. Corson, K. R. MacKenzie, and Emilio Segr of the University of California, Berkeley by barraging bismuth with alpha particles. An earlier name for the element was ''alabamine'' (Ab).
Occurrence
Astatine is produced by bombarding bismuth with energetic alpha particles to obtain relatively long lived At 209 At 211, which can then be distilled from the target by heating in the presence of air.
Isotopes
Astatine has 41 known isotopes, all of which are radioactive the longest lived isotope is sup210 supAt which has a half life of 8.1 hours. The shortest lived isotope is sup213 supAt which has a half life of 125 nanoseconds.
References
External links
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Halogens
bs:Astatin
ca: stat
cs:Astat
da:Astat
de:Astat
et:Astaat
es:Astato
eo:Astato
fr:Astate
ko:
io:Astatino
is:Astat
it:Astato
he:
lv:Astats
lt:Astatas
hu:Aszt cium
nl:Astatium
ja:
no:Astat
nn:Astat
oc:Astat
pl:Astat
pt:Astato
ru:
sl:Astat
sr:
fi:Astatiini
sv:Astat
th:
uk:
zh:
border "1" cellspacing "0" align "right" cellpadding "2" style "margin left:1em"
! bgcolor gray Atom
align "center" align center Model of the atom 3 D Helium atom ground state
align "center" '''Helium atom model'''brShowing nucleus with two protons (blue) brand two neutrons (red), brorbited by two electrons (waves).
! bgcolor gray Classification
align "center"
Smallest recognised division of a chemical element
! bgcolor gray Properties
align "center"
Mass: 1.66 10 to 4.52 10 kg
Electric charge: zero
Diameter:
10 pm to 100 pm
In chemistry and physics, an '''atom''' (Greek '''' meaning "indivisible") is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical properties. The word ''atom'' may also refer to the smallest possible indivisible fundamental particle. This definition must not be confused with that of chemical atoms, since chemical atoms (hereafter "atoms") are composed of smaller subatomic particles.
Most atoms are composed of three types of subatomic particles which govern their external properties:
electrons, which have a negative charge and are the least massive of the three
protons, which have a positive charge and are about 1836 times more massive than electrons and
neutrons, which have no charge and are about 1838 times more massive than electrons.
Protons and neutrons are both nucleons and make up the dense, massive atomic nucleus. The electrons form the much larger electron cloud surrounding the nucleus.
Atoms differ in the number of each of the subatomic particles they contain. The number of protons in an atom (called the atomic number) determines the element of the atom. Within a single element, the number of neutrons may also vary, determining the isotope of that element. Atoms are electrically neutral if they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Electrons that are furthest from the nucleus may be transferred to other nearby atoms or even shared between atoms. Atoms which have either a deficit or a surplus of electrons are called ions. The number of protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus may also change, via nuclear fusion, nuclear fission or radioactive decay.
Atoms are the fundamental building blocks of chemistry, and are conserved in chemical reactions. Atoms are able to bond into molecules and other types of chemical compounds. Molecules are made up of multiple atoms for example, a molecule of water is a combination of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
Properties of the atom
Subatomic particles
:''see main article subatomic particles
Although the name "atom" was applied at a time when atoms were thought to be indivisible, it is now known that the atom can be broken down into a number of smaller components. The first of these to be discovered was the negatively charged electron, which is easily ejected from atoms during ionization. The electrons orbit a small, dense body containing all of the positive charge in the atom, called the atomic nucleus. This nucleus is itself made up of nucleons: positively charged protons and chargeless neutrons.
Before 1961, the subatomic particles were thought to consist of only protons, neutrons and electrons. However, protons and neutrons themselves are now known to consist of still smaller particles called quarks. In addition, the electron is known to have a nearly massless neutral partner called a neutrino. Together, the electron and neutrino are both leptons.
Ordinary atoms are composed only of quarks and leptons of the first generation. The proton is composed of two up quarks and one down quark, whereas the neutron is composed of one up quark and two down quarks. Although they do not occur in ordinary matter, two other heavier generations of quarks and leptons may be generated in high energy collisions.
The subatomic force carrying particles (called gauge bosons) are also important to atoms. Electrons are bound to the nucleus by photons carrying the electromagnetic force. Protons and neutrons are bound together in the nucleus by gluons carrying the strong nuclear force.
Electron configuration
:''see main article electron configuration''
The chemical behavior of atoms is due to interactions between electrons. Electrons of an atom remain within certain, predictable electron configurations. These configurations are determined by the quantum mechanics of electrons in the electric potential of the atom the principal quantum number determines particular electron shells with distinct energy levels. Generally, the higher the energy level of a shell, the further away it is from the nucleus. The electrons in the outermost shell, called the valence electrons, have the greatest influence on chemical behavior. Core electrons (those not in the outer shell) play a role, but it is usually in terms of a secondary effect due to screening of the positive charge in the atomic nucleus.
wavefunctions of a hydrogen atom. The principal quantum number is at the right of each row and the azimuthal quantum number is denoted by letter at top of each column.
An electron shell can hold up to 2''n''sup2 sup electrons, where ''n'' is the principal quantum number of the shell. The occupied shell of greatest ''n'' is the valence shell, even if it only has one electron. In the most stable ground state, an atom's electrons will fill up its shells in order of increasing energy. Under some circumstances an electron may be excited to a higher energy level (that is, it absorbs energy from an external source and leaps to a higher shell), leaving a space in a lower shell. An excited atom's electrons will spontaneously fall into lower levels, emitting excess energy as a photons, until it returns to the ground state.
In addition to its principal quantum number ''n'', an electron is distinguished by three other quantum numbers: the azimuthal quantum number ''l'' (describing the orbital angular momentum of the electron), the magnetic quantum number ''m'' (describing the direction of the angular momentum vector), and the spin quantum number ''s'' (describing the direction of the electron's intrinsic angular momentum). Electrons with varying ''l'' and ''m'' have distinctive shapes denoted by spectroscopic notation. In the illustration, the letters '''s''', '''p''', '''d''' and '''f''' (corresponding to ''l'' 0,1,2,3) describe the shape of the atomic orbital. In most atoms, orbitals of differing ''l'' are not exactly degenerate but separated into a fine structure. Orbitals of differing ''m'' are degenerate but may be separated by applying a magnetic field, creating the Zeeman effect. Electrons with differing ''s'' have very slight energy differences called hyperfine splitting.
Nucleon properties
The constituent protons and neutrons of the atomic nucleus are collectively called nucleons. The nucleons are held together in the nucleus by the strong nuclear force.
Nuclei can undergo transformations that affect the number of protons and neutrons they contain, a process called radioactive decay. When nuclei transformations take place spontaneously, this process is called radioactivity. Radioactive transformations proceed by a wide variety of modes, but the most common are alpha decay (emission of a helium nucleus) and beta decay (emission of an electron). Decays involving electrons or positrons are due to the weak nuclear interaction.
In addition, like the electrons of the atom, the nucleons of nuclei may be pushed into excited states of higher energy. However, these transitions typically require thousands of times more energy than electron excitations. When an excited nucleus emits a photon to return to the ground state, the photon has very high energy and is called a gamma ray.
Nuclear transformations also take place in nuclear reactions. In nuclear fusion, two light nuclei come together and merge into a single heavier nucleus. In nuclear fission, a single large nucleus is divided into two or more smaller nuclei.
Atom size and speed
Atoms are much smaller than the wavelengths of light that human vision can detect, so atoms cannot be seen in any kind of optical microscope. However, there are ways of detecting the positions of atoms on the surface of a solid or a thin film so as to obtain images. These include: electron microscopes (such as in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)), atomic force microscopy (AFM), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and x ray microscopy.
Since the electron cloud does not have a sharp cutoff, the size of an atom is not easily defined. For atoms that can form solid crystal lattices, the distance between the centers of adjacent atoms can be easily determined by x ray diffraction, giving an estimate of the atoms' size. For any atom, one might use the radius at which the electrons of the valence shell are most likely to be found. As an example, the size of a hydrogen atom is estimated to be approximately 1.058610m (twice the Bohr radius). Compare this to the size of the proton (the only particle in the nucleus of the hydrogen atom), which is approximately 10m. So the ratio of the size of the hydrogen atom to its nucleus is about 100,000:1. If an atom were the size of a stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a marble. Nearly all the mass of an atom is in its nucleus, yet almost all the space in an atom is filled by its electrons.
Atoms of different elements do vary in size, but the sizes do not scale linearly with the mass of the atom. Their sizes are roughly the same to within a factor of 2. The reason for this is that heavy elements have large positive charge on their nuclei, which strongly attract the electrons to the center of the atom. This contracts the size of the electron shells, so that more electrons fit in the only a slightly greater volume.
The temperature of a collection of atoms is a measure of the average energy of motion of those atoms at 0 kelvins (absolute zero) atoms would have no motion. As the temperature of the system is increased, the kinetic energy of the particles in the system is increased, and their speed of motion increases. At room temperature, atoms making up gases in the air move at a speed of 500m s (about 1100 mph or 1800 km h).
Elements, isotopes and ions
Atoms are generally classified by their atomic number ''Z'', which corresponds to the number of protons in the atom. The atomic number determines which chemical element the atom is. For example, carbon atoms are atoms containing six protons. All atoms with the same atomic number share a wide variety of physical properties and exhibit the same chemical properties. The elements may be sorted according to the periodic table in order of increasing atomic number.
The atomic mass ''A'', atomic mass number, or nucleon number of an element is the total number of protons and neutrons in an atom of that element, so called because each proton and neutron has a mass of about 1amu. The number of neutrons ''A'' ''Z'' in an atom has no effect on which element it is. Each element can have numerous kinds of atoms with the same number of protons and electrons but varying numbers of neutrons. Each has the same atomic number but a different mass number. These are called the isotopes of an element. When writing the name of an isotope, the element name is followed by the mass number. For example, carbon 14 contains 6 protons and 8 neutrons in each atom, for a total mass number of 14.
The atomic mass listed for each element in the periodic table is an average of the isotope masses found in nature, weighted by their abundance.
The simplest atom is the hydrogen isotope protium, which has atomic number 1 and atomic mass number 1 it consists of one proton and one electron. The hydrogen isotope which also contains one neutron so is called deuterium or hydrogen 2 the hydrogen isotope with two neutrons is called tritium or hydrogen 3. Tritium is an unstable isotope which decays through a process called radioactivity. Almost all isotopes of each element are radioactive only a few are stable. The elements with atomic number 84 (polonium) and heavier have no stable isotopes and are all radioactive.
Virtually all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were created through stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis. Most of the elements lighter than uranium (''Z'' 92) have stable enough isotopes to occur naturally on Earth (with the notable exception of technetium ''Z'' 43). Several elements that do not occur on Earth have been found to be present in stars. Elements not normally found in nature have been artificially created by nuclear bombardment as of 2006, elements have been created through atomic number 116 (given the temporary name ununhexium). These ultra heavy elements are generally highly unstable and decay quickly.
Atoms that have either lost or gained electrons are called atomic ions (with either positive( ) or negative charge( ), respectively).
Valence and bonding
:''see main article valence electrons and chemical bond''
The number of electrons in an atom's outermost shell (the valence shell) governs its bonding behavior. Therefore, elements with the same number of valence electrons are grouped together in the columns of the periodic table of the elements. Alkali metals contain one electron on their outer shell alkaline earth metals, two electrons halogens, seven electrons and various others.
Every atom is most stable with a full valence shell. This means that atoms with full valence shells (the noble gases) are very unreactive. Conversely, atoms with few electrons in their valence shell are more reactive it is. Alkali metals are therefore very reactive, with caesium, rubidium, and francium being the most reactive of all metals. Also, atoms that need only few electrons (such as the halogens) to fill their valence shells are reactive. Fluorine is the most reactive of all elements.
Atoms may fill their valence shells by chemical bonding. This can be achieved one of two ways: an atom can either share electrons with other atoms (a ''covalent bond''), or it can remove electrons from (or donate electrons to) other atoms (an ''ionic bond''). The formation of a bond causes a strong attraction between two atoms, creating molecules or ionic compounds. Many other types of bonds exist, including:
polar covalent bonds
coordinate covalent bonds
metallic bonds
hydrogen bonds and
van der Waals bonds.
Atomic spectrum
:''see main article Atomic spectroscopy''
Since each element in the periodic table consists of an atom in a unique configuration with different numbers of protons and electrons, each element can also be uniquely described by the energies of its atomic orbitals and the number of electrons within them. Normally, an atom is found in its lowest energy ground state states with higher energy are called excited states. An electron may move from a lower energy orbital to a higher energy orbital by absorbing a photon with energy equal to the difference between the energies of the two levels. An electron in a higher energy orbital may drop to a lower energy orbital by emitting a photon. Since each element has a unique set of energy levels, each creates its own light pattern unique to itself: its own spectral signature.
If a set of atoms is heated (such as in an arc lamp), their electrons will move into excited states. When these atoms fall back toward the ground state, they will produce an emission spectrum. If a set of atoms is illuminated by a continuous spectrum, it will only absorb specific wavelengths (energies) of photon that correspond to the differences in its energy levels. The resulting pattern of gaps is called the absorption spectrum.
In spectroscopic analysis, scientists can use a spectrometer to study the atoms in stars and other distant objects. Due to the distinctive spectral lines that each element produces, they are able to tell the chemical composition of distant planets, stars and nebulae.
Not all parts of the atomic spectrum are in visible light part of the electromagnetic spectrum. For example, the hyperfine transitions (including the important 21 cm line) produce low energy radio waves. When electrons deep inside large atoms are knocked out (for example by beta radiation), replacement atoms fall deep into the electric potential of the nucleus, producing high energy x rays.
Atoms and antimatter
:''see main article antimatter
Antimatter can also form atoms, composed of positrons, antiprotons, and antineutrons. Since antimatter is very difficult to produce and store, only a small amount antihydrogen has ever existed on Earth. This was produced at CERN in the ATHENA and ATRAP experiments using the Antiproton Decelerator.
Atoms and the Big Bang
In models of the Big Bang, Big Bang nucleosynthesis predicts that within one to three minutes of the Big Bang almost all atomic material in the universe was created. During this process, nuclei of hydrogen and helium formed abundantly, but almost no elements heavier than lithium. Hydrogen makes up approximately 75 of the atoms in the universe helium makes up 24 and all other elements make up just 1 . However, although nuclei (fully ionized atoms) were created, neutral atoms themselves could not form in the intense heat.
Big Bang chronology of the atom continues to approximately 379,000 years after the Big Bang when the cosmic temperature had dropped to just 3,000K. It was then cool enough to allow the nuclei to capture electrons. This process is called recombination, during which the first neutral atoms took form. Once atoms become neutral, they only absorb photons of a discrete absorption spectrum. This allows most of the photons in the universe to travel unimpeded for billions of years. These photons are still detectable today in the cosmic microwave background.
After Big Bang nucleosynthesis, no heavier elements could be created until the formation of the first stars. These stars fused heavier elements through stellar nucleosynthesis during their lives and through supernova nucleosynthesis as they died. The seeding of the interstellar medium by heavy elements eventually allowed the formation of terrestrial planets like the Earth.
History of atomic theory
Early atomism
From the 6th century BC, Hindu, Buddhist and Jaina philosophers in ancient India developed the earliest atomic theories. The first philosopher who formulated ideas about the atom in a systematic manner was Kanada who lived in the 6th century BC. Another Indian philosopher, Pakudha Katyayana who also lived in the 6th century BC and was a contemporary of Gautama Buddha, had also propounded ideas about the atomic constitution of the material world. Indian atomists believed that an atom could be one of upto six elements, with each element having upto 24 properties. They developed detailed theories of how atoms could combine, react, vibrate, move, and perform other actions, and had particularly elaborate theories of how atoms combine, which explains how atoms first combine in pairs, and then group into trios of pairs, which are the smallest visible units of matter. This parallels with the structure of modern atomic theory, in which pairs or triplets of supposedly fundamental quarks combine to create most typical forms of matter. They had also suggested the possibility of splitting an atom which, as we know today, is the source of atomic energy. (See Indian atomism for more details.)
Democritus and Leucippus, Greek philosophers in the 5th century BC, presented a theory of atoms. (See Atomism for more details.) The Greeks believed that atoms were all made of the same material but had different shapes and sizes, which determined the physical properties of the material. For instance, the atoms of a liquid were thought to be smooth, allowing them to slide over each other. None of these ideas, however, were founded in scientific experimentation.
During the Middle Ages (the Islamic Golden Age), Islamic atomists develop atomic theories that represent a synthesis of both Greek and Indian atomism. (See Islamic atomism for more details.) Older Greek and Indian ideas were further developed by Islamic atomists, along with new Islamic ideas, such as the possibility of there being particles smaller than an atom. As Islamic influence began spreading through Europe, the ideas of Islamic atomism, along with the older ideas of Greek and Indian atomism, spread throughout Europe by the end of the Middle Ages, where modern atomic theories began taking shape.
Birth of modern atomic theory
In 1808, John Dalton proposed that an element is composed of atoms of a single, unique type, and that although their shape and structure was immutable, atoms of different elements could combine to form more complex structures (chemical compounds). He deduced this after the experimental discovery of the law of multiple proportions that is, if two elements form more than one compound between them, then the ratios of the masses of the second element which combine with a fixed mass of the first element will be ratios of small whole numbers.
The experiment in question involved combining nitrous oxide (NO) with oxygen (Osub2 sub). In one combination, these gases formed dinitrogen trioxide (Nsub2 subOsub3 sub), but when he repeated the combination with double the amount of oxygen (a ratio of 1:2), they instead formed nitrogen dioxide (NOsub2 sub).
4NO Osub2 sub 2Nsub2 subOsub3 sub
4NO 2Osub2 sub 4NOsub2 sub
Atomic theory conflicted with the theory of infinite divisibility, which states that matter can always be divided into smaller parts. In 1827, biologist Robert Brown observed that pollen grains floating in water constantly jiggled about for no apparent reason. In 1905, Albert Einstein theorised that this Brownian motion was caused by the water molecules continuously knocking the grains about, and developed a mathematical theory around it. This theory was validated experimentally in 1911 by French physicist Jean Perrin.
Discovery of subatomic particles
For much of this time, atoms were thought to be the smallest possible division of matter. However, in 1897, J.J. Thomson published his work proving that cathode rays are made of negatively charged particles (electrons). Since cathode rays are emitted from matter, this proved that atoms are made up of subatomic particles and are therefore divisible, and not the indivisible ''atomos'' postulated by Democritus. Physicists later invented a new term for such indivisible units, "elementary particles", since the word atom had come into its common modern use.
Study of atomic structure
At first, it was believed that the electrons were distributed more or less uniformly in a sea of positive charge (the plum pudding model). However, an experiment conducted in 1909 by colleagues of Ernest Rutherford demonstrated that atoms have a most of their mass and positive charge concentrated in a nucleus. In the gold foil experiment, alpha particles (emitted by polonium) were shot through a sheet of gold. Rutherford observed that most of the particles passed straight through the sheet with little deflection (striking a fluorescent screen on the other side). About 1 in 8000 of the alpha particles, however, were heavily deflected (by more than 90 degrees). This led to the planetary model of the atom in which pointlike electrons orbited in the space around a massive compact nucleus like planets orbiting the Sun.
The nucleus was later discovered to contain protons, and further experimentation by Rutherford found that the nuclear mass of most atoms surpassed that of the protons it possessed this led him to postulate the existence of neutrons, whose existence would be proven in 1932 by James Chadwick.
The planetary model of the atom still had shortcomings. Firstly, a moving electric charge emits electromagnetic waves according to classical electromagnetism, an orbiting charge would steadily lose energy and spiral towards the nucleus, colliding with it in a tiny fraction of a second. Secondly, the model did not explain why excited atoms emit light only in certain discrete spectra.
Quantum theory revolutionized physics at the beginning of the 20supth sup century when Max Planck and Albert Einstein postulated that light energy is emitted or absorbed in fixed amounts known as quanta. In 1913, Niels Bohr used this idea in his Bohr model of the atom, in which the electrons could only orbit the nucleus in particular circular orbits with fixed angular momentum and energy. They were not allowed to spiral into the nucleus, because they could not lose energy in a continuous manner they could only make quantum leaps between fixed energy levels. Bohr's model was extended by Arnold Sommerfeld in 1916 to include elliptical orbits, using a quantization of generalized momentum.
The ad hoc Bohr Sommerfeld model was extremely difficult to use, but it made impressive predictions in agreement with certain spectral properties. However, the model was unable to explain multielectron atoms, predict transition rates or describe fine and hyperfine structure. In 1925, Erwin Schr dinger developed a full theory of quantum mechanics, described by the Schr dinger equation. Together with Wolfgang Pauli's exclusion principle, this allowed study of atoms with great precision when digital computers became available. Even today, these theories are used in the Hartree Fock quantum chemical method to determine the energy levels of atoms. Further refinements of quantum theory such as the Dirac equation and quantum field theory made smaller impacts on the theory of atoms.
Another model of historical interest, proposed by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1916, had cubical atoms with electrons statically held at the corners. The cubes could share edges or faces to form chemical bonds. This model was created to account for chemical phenomena such as bonding, rather than physical phenomena such as atomic spectra.
See also
Atomism
Basic quantum mechanics
Chemical bond
Exotic atom
Infinite divisibility
List of particles
Radioactive isotope
Superatom
Super heavy atom
Transuranium element
References
Kenneth S. Krane, ''Introductory Nuclear Physics'' (1987)
External links
af:Atoom
ar: ( )
an:Atomo
ast: tomu
bg:
bs:Atom
br:Atom
ca: tom
cs:Atom
da:Atom
de:Atom
et:Aatom
es: tomo
eo:Atomo
fa:
fr:Atome
gl: tomo
ko:
hr:Atom
io:Atomo
id:Atom
ia:Atomo
is:Frumeind
it:Teoria atomica
he:
kn:
ka:
la:Atomus
lv:Atoms
lt:Atomas
hu:Atom
mk:
ms:Atom
nl:Atoom
nds:Atom
ja:
no:Atom
nn:Atom
pl:Atom
pt: tomo
ro:Atom
ru:
simple:Atom
sk:At m
sl:Atom
sr:
su:Atom
fi:Atomi
sv:Atom
tl:Atomo
ta:
th:
vi:Nguy n t
tr:Atom
bug:Atong
uk:
zh:
thumb 220px Modern arable agriculture typically uses large field (agriculture) fields like this one in Dorset, England.
In geography, '''arable land''' (from Latin ''arare'', to plough ) is a form of agricultural land use, meaning land that can be (and is) used for growing crops. David Ricardo incorporated the idea of arable land into economic theory.
Of the earth's 57 million square miles (148,000,000km) of land, more than 12 million square miles (31,000,000km) are arable.
Most of the arable land on earth is around the largest rivers on earth. Some examples are: the Nile River, the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, the Yellow River, the Amazon River, the Ganges and the Rhine River. These rivers flood regularly, overspilling their banks. When the flood is over, the rivers recede, leaving behind rich silt. This silt is excellent fertilizer for crops. Even if the land is overfarmed, and all the nutrients are depleted from the soil, the land renews its fertility when the next flood comes. Rivers and streams can make desert land arable.
Unarable land
On unarable land, farming is nearly impossible unless more advanced methods of agriculture are used. Unarable land usually has no source of fresh water, and is often too hot (desert), too cold (arctic), too rocky, too mountainous, too salty, too rainy, too snowy, or too cloudy. Clouds block the sunlight plants need for photosynthesis (making sunlight into food). The plants starve without light. Starvation and nomadism often exist on unarable land. Unarable land is sometimes called 'wastes', 'badlands', 'worthless' or 'no man's land'.
Sometimes, unarable land can be turned into arable land. New arable land makes more food, and can prevent starvation, saving lives. This also makes the country more self sufficient and politically independent, because the country doesn't have to buy food from other countries. Making unarable land arable often involves digging new irrigation canals and new wells, aquaducts, desalination plants, planting trees for shade in the desert, hydroponics, fertilizer, nitrogen fertilizer, pesticides, reverse osmosis water processors, mylar insulation or other insulation against heat and cold, digging ditches and hills for protection against the wind, and greenhouses with internal light and heat for protection against the cold outside and to provide light in cloudy areas.
Some examples of infertile '''unarable''' land being turned into fertile '''arable''' land are:
Aran Island: This island off the west coast of Ireland, (not to be confused with the Isle of Arran in Scotland's Firth of Clyde), was unarable because it was too rocky. The people covered the island with a shallow layer of seaweed and sand from the ocean. This made it arable. Today, they grow crops there.
Israel: Israel was mostly unarable desert until desalination plants were built on the coast. The plants turn salt water into fresh water for farming, drinking, and washing. They created their own large fresh water source.
Some examples of fertile '''arable''' land being turned into infertile '''unarable''' land are:
Droughts like the 'dust bowl' of the Great Depression in the U.S. turned farmland into desert.
Rainforest Deforestation: The fertile tropical forests turn into infertile desert land.
Romans' destruction of Carthage: At the end of the Punic Wars, the victorious Romans sowed the earth with salt, to symbolize total victory. The Roman symbol meant that Carthage would never grow back their civilization ended. Crops won't generally grow in salty soil. This is why salt water from the ocean can't be used to water crops.
Each year more arable land is lost to desertification and erosion from human industrial activities. Irrigation of farm land also increases the sodium, calcium, and magnesium in the soil. This process steadily concentrates salt in the ground, decreasing productivity for crops that are not salt tolerant.
Urban sprawl: In the United States, about 2.2 million acres (8,900 km ) of land was added to urban areas between 1992 and 2002, much of it farm land now paved.
See also
List of environment topics
External links
Category:Agriculture
Category:Horticulture
'''Aluminium''' or '''aluminum''' (see the spelling section below) is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol '''Al''' and atomic number 13. It is a silvery and ductile member of the poor metal group of chemical elements. Aluminium is found primarily as the ore bauxite and is remarkable for its resistance to corrosion (due to the phenomenon of passivation) and its light weight. Aluminium is used in many industries to make millions of different products and is very important to the world economy. Structural components made from aluminium and its alloys are vital to the aerospace industry and very important in other areas of transportation and building in which light weight, durability, and strength are needed.
Properties
Aluminium is a soft and lightweight metal with a dull silvery appearance, due to a thin layer of oxidation that forms quickly when it is exposed to air. Aluminium is nontoxic (as the metal), non magnetic, and non sparking. Pure aluminium has a tensile strength of about 49 megapascals (MPa) and 400 MPa if it is formed into an alloy. Aluminium is about one third as dense as steel or copper is malleable, ductile, and easily machined and cast and has excellent corrosion resistance and durability due to the protective oxide layer. Aluminium mirror finish has the highest reflectance of any metal in the 200 400 nm (UV) , and the 3000 10000 nm (far IR) regions, while in the 400 700 nm visible range it is slightly outdone by silver, and in the 700 3000 (near IR) by silver, gold and copper. It is the second most malleable metal (after gold) and the sixth most ductile. Aluminium is a good heat conductor which is why it is used to make saucepans.
Diagram.
Applications
Whether measured in terms of quantity or value, the use of aluminium exceeds that of any other metal except iron, and it is important in virtually all segments of the world economy.
Pure aluminium has a low tensile strength, but readily forms alloys with many elements such as copper, zinc, magnesium, manganese and silicon (e.g.duralumin). Today almost all materials that claim to be aluminium are actually an alloy thereof. Pure aluminium is encountered only when corrosion resistance is more important than strength or hardness. Conversely, the term "alloy" in general use today usually means aluminium alloy.
When combined with thermo mechanical processing aluminium alloys display a marked improvement in mechanical properties. Aluminium alloys form vital components of aircraft and rockets as a result of their high strength to weight ratio.
When aluminium is evaporated in a vacuum it forms a coating that reflects both visible light and infrared. These coatings form a thin layer of protective aluminium oxide that does not deteriorate as silver coatings do. In particular, nearly all modern mirrors are made using a thin reflective coating of aluminium on the back surface of a sheet of float glass. Telescope mirrors are also coated with a thin layer of aluminium, but are front coated to avoid internal reflections even though this makes the surface more susceptible to damage.
used for the soft drink Diet Coke.
Some of the many uses for aluminium are in:
Transportation (automobiles, airplanes, trucks, railroad cars, marine vessels, bicycles etc.)
Packaging (cans, foil, etc.)
Water treatment
Construction (windows, doors, siding, building wire, etc.
Consumer durable goods (appliances, cooking utensils, etc.)
Electrical transmission lines (aluminium components and wires are less dense than those made of copper and are lower in price , but also present higher electrical resistance. Many localities prohibit the use of aluminum in residential wiring practices because of its higher resistance and thermal expansion value.)
Machinery
MKM steel and Alnico magnets, although non magnetic itself
Super purity aluminium (SPA, 99.980 to 99.999 Al), used in electronics and CDs.
Powdered aluminium, a commonly used silvering agent in paint. Aluminium flakes may also be included in undercoat paints, particularly wood primer on drying, the flakes overlap to produce a water resistant barrier.
Anodised aluminium is more stable to further oxidation, and is used in various fields of construction, as well as heat sinking.
Most electronic appliances that require cooling of their internal devices (like transistors, CPUs semiconductors in general) have heat sinks that are made of aluminium due to its ease of manufacture and good heat conductivity. Copper heat sinks are smaller although more expensive and harder to manufacture.
Aluminium oxide, alumina, is found naturally as corundum (rubies and sapphires), emery, and is used in glass making. Synthetic ruby and sapphire are used in lasers for the production of coherent light.
Aluminium oxidises very energetically and as a result has found use in solid rocket fuels, thermite, and other pyrotechnic compositions.
Aluminium is also a superconductor, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2 kelvins.
Engineering use
Aluminium alloys with a wide range of properties are used in engineering structures. Alloy systems are classified by a number system (ANSI) or by names indicating their main alloying constituents (DIN and ISO). Selecting the right alloy for a given application entails considerations of strength, ductility, formability, weldability and corrosion resistance to name a few. A brief historical overview of alloys and manufacturing technologies is given in Ref. ref name sandersR.E. Sanders, Technology Innovation in Aluminum Products, ''The Journal of The Minerals'', 53(2):21 25, 2001. ref.
Improper use of aluminium can result in problems, particularly in contrast to iron or steel, which appear "better behaved" to the intuitive designer, mechanic, or technician. The reduction by two thirds of the weight of an aluminium part compared to a similarly sized iron or steel part seems enormously attractive, but it should be noted that it is accompanied by a reduction by two thirds in the stiffness of the part. Therefore, although direct replacement of an iron or steel part with a duplicate made from aluminium may still give acceptable strength to withstand peak loads, the increased flexibility will cause three times more deflection in the part.
Where failure is not an issue but excessive flex is undesirable due to requirements for precision of location or efficiency of transmission of power, simple replacement of steel tubing with similarly sized aluminium tubing will result in a degree of flex which is undesirable for instance, the increased flex under operating loads caused by replacing steel bicycle frame tubing with aluminium tubing of identical dimensions will cause misalignment of the power train as well as absorbing the operating force. To increase the rigidity by increasing the thickness of the walls of the tubing increases the weight proportionately, so that the advantages of lighter weight are lost as the rigidity is restored.
Aluminium can best be used by redesigning the part to suit its characteristics for instance making a bicycle of aluminium tubing which has an oversize diameter rather than thicker walls. In this way, rigidity can be restored or even enhanced without increasing weight. The limit to this process is the increase in susceptibility to what is termed "buckling" failure, where the deviation of the force from any direction other than directly along the axis of the tubing causes folding of the walls of the tubing.
The latest models of the Corvette automobile, among others, are a good example of redesigning parts to make best use of aluminium's advantages. The aluminium chassis members and suspension parts of these cars have large overall dimensions for stiffness but are lightened by reducing cross sectional area and removing unneeded metal as a result, they are not only equally or more durable and stiff as the usual steel parts, but they possess an airy gracefulness which most people find attractive. Similarly, aluminium bicycle frames can be optimally designed so as to provide rigidity where required, yet have flexibility in terms of absorbing the shock of bumps from the road and not transmitting them to the rider.
The strength and durability of aluminium varies widely, not only as a result of the components of the specific alloy, but also as a result of the particular manufacturing process for this reason, it has from time to time gained a bad reputation. For instance, a high frequency of failure in many early aluminium bicycle frames in the 1970s resulted in just such a poor reputation with a moment's reflection, however, the widespread use of aluminium components in the aerospace and automotive high performance industries, where huge stresses are undergone with vanishingly small failure rates, proves that properly built aluminium bicycle components should not be unusually unreliable, and this has subsequently proved to be the case.
Similarly, use of aluminium in automotive applications, particularly in engine parts which must survive in difficult conditions, has benefited from development over time. An Audi engineer commented about the V12 engine, producing over 500 horsepower (370 kW), of an Auto Union race car of the 1930s which was recently restored by the Audi factory, that the aluminium alloy of which the engine was constructed would today be used only for lawn furniture and the like. Even the aluminium cylinder heads and crankcase of the Corvair, built as recently as the 1960s, earned a reputation for failure and stripping of threads in holes, even as large as spark plug holes, which is not seen in current aluminium cylinder heads.
Often, aluminium's sensitivity to heat must also be considered. Even a relatively routine workshop procedure involving heating is complicated by the fact that aluminium, as opposed to steels, will melt without first turning red. Forming operations where a blow torch is used therefore requires some expertise since no visual signs reveal how close the material is to melting. Aluminium also will accumulate internal stresses and strains under conditions of overheating while not immediately obvious, the tendency of the metal to "creep" under sustained stresses results in delayed distortions, for instance the commonly observed warping or cracking of aluminium automobile cylinder heads after an engine is overheated, sometimes as long as years later, or the tendency of welded aluminium bicycle frames to gradually twist out of alignment from the stresses accumulated during the welding process. For this reason, many uses of aluminium in the aerospace industry avoid heat altogether by joining parts using adhesives this was also used for some of the early aluminium bicycle frames in the 1970s, with unfortunate results when the aluminium tubing corroded slightly, loosening the bond of the adhesive and leading to failure of the frame. Stresses from overheating aluminium can be relieved by heat treating the parts in an oven and gradually cooling, in effect annealing the stresses this can also result, however, in the part becoming distorted as a result of these stresses, so that such heat treating of welded bicycle frames, for instance, results in a significant fraction becoming misaligned. If the misalignment is not too severe, once cooled they can be bent back into alignment with no negative consequences of course, if the frame is properly designed for rigidity (see above), this will require enormous force.
Household wiring
Because of its high conductivity and relatively low price compared to copper at the time, aluminium was introduced for household electrical wiring to a large degree in the United States in the 1960s. Unfortunately, many of the wiring fixtures at the time were not designed to accept aluminium wire. More specifically:
The greater coefficient of thermal expansion of aluminium, causes the wire to expand and contract relative to the dissimilar metal screw connection, eventually loosening the connection.
Pure aluminium has a tendency to "creep" under steady sustained pressure (to a greater degree as the temperature rises), again producing a degree of looseness in an initially tight connection.
Galvanic corrosion from the dissimilar metals increases the electrical resistance of the connection.
In combination, these properties caused connections between electrical fixtures and aluminium wiring to overheat which resulted in several fires. As a result, aluminium household wiring has become unpopular, and in many jurisdictions it is not permitted in very small sizes in new construction. However, aluminium wiring can be safely used with fixtures whose connections are designed to avoid loosening and overheating. Older fixtures of this type are marked "Al Cu", and newer ones are marked "CO ALR". Otherwise, aluminium wiring can be terminated by crimping it to a short "pigtail" of copper wire, which can be treated as any other copper wire. A properly done crimp, requiring high pressure produced by the proper tool, is tight enough not only to eliminate any thermal expansion of the aluminium, but also to exclude any atmospheric oxygen and thus prevent corrosion between dissimilar metals. New alloys are used for aluminium building wire today in combination with aluminium terminations. Connections made with these standard industry products are as safe and reliable as copper connections.
:''See also'':Aluminium wire
History
The ancient Greeks and Romans used salts of this metal as dyeing mordants and as astringents for dressing wounds, and alum is still used as a styptic. Further Joseph Needham suggested finds in 1974 showed the ancient Chinese used aluminium (''see "notes" linked above''). In 1761 Guyton de Morveau suggested calling the base alum 'alumine'. In 1808, Humphry Davy identified the existence of a metal base of alum, which he named (''see Spelling section'').
Friedrich W hler is generally credited with isolating aluminium (Latin ''alumen'', alum) in 1827 by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium. However, the metal had been produced for the first time two years earlier in an impure form by the Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian rsted. Therefore almanacs and chemistry sites often list rsted as the discoverer of aluminium. Still it would further be P. Berthier who discovered aluminium in bauxite ore and successfully extracted it. The Frenchman Henri Saint Claire Deville improved W hler's method in 1846 and described his improvements in a book in 1859, chief among these being the substitution of sodium for the considerably more expensive potassium.
The American Charles Martin Hall of Oberlin, OH applied for a patent (400655) in 1886 for an electrolytic process to extract aluminium using the same technique that was independently being developed by the Frenchman Paul H roult in Europe. The invention of the Hall H roult process in 1886 made extracting aluminium from minerals cheaper, and is now the principal method in common use throughout the world. The Hall Heroult process cannot produce Super Purity Aluminium directly. Upon approval of his patent in 1889, Hall, with the financial backing of Alfred E. Hunt of Pittsburgh, PA, started the Pittsburgh Reduction Company, renamed to Aluminum Company of America in 1907, later shortened to Alcoa.
London, was made in 1893 and is one of the first statues to be cast in aluminium. Aluminium was selected as the material to be used for the apex of the Washington Monument, at a time when one ounce cost twice the daily wages of a common worker in the project.
Germany became the world leader in aluminium production soon after Adolf Hitler seized power. By 1942, however, new hydroelectric power projects such as the Grand Coulee Dam gave the United States something Nazi Germany could not hope to compete with, namely the capability of producing enough aluminium to manufacture sixty thousand warplanes in four years.
Natural occurrence
Although aluminium is the most abundant metallic element in Earth's crust (believed to be 7.5 to 8.1 ), it is very rare in its free form and was once considered a precious metal more valuable than gold. Napoleon III of France had a set of aluminium plates reserved for his finest guests. Others had to make do with gold ones. Aluminium has been produced in commercial quantities for just over 100 years.
Aluminium was, when it was first discovered, extremely difficult to separate from its ore. Aluminium is among the most difficult metals on Earth to refine, despite the fact that it is one of the planet's most common. The reason is that aluminium is oxidised very rapidly and that its oxide is an extremely stable compound that, unlike rust on iron, does not flake off. The very reason for which aluminium is used in many applications is why it is so hard to produce.
Recovery of this metal from scrap (via recycling) has become an important component of the aluminium industry. Recycling involves simply melting the metal, which is far less expensive than creating it from ore. Refining aluminium requires enormous amounts of electricity recycling it requires only 5 of the energy to produce it. A common practice since the early 1900s, aluminium recycling is not new. It was, however, a low profile activity until the late 1960s when the exploding popularity of aluminium beverage cans finally placed recycling into the public consciousness. Other sources for recycled aluminium include automobile parts, windows and doors, appliances, containers and other products.
Aluminium is a reactive metal and it is hard to extract it from its ore, aluminium oxide (Alsub2 subOsub3 sub). Direct reduction, with carbon for example, is not economically viable since aluminium oxide has a melting point of about 2000 C. Therefore, it is extracted by electrolysis the aluminium oxide is dissolved in molten cryolite and then reduced to the pure metal. By this process, the actual operational temperature of the reduction cells is around 950 to 980 C. Cryolite was originally found as a mineral on Greenland, but has been replaced by a synthetic cryolite. Cryolite is a mixture of aluminium, sodium, and calcium fluorides: (Nasub3 subAlFsub6 sub). The aluminium oxide (a white powder) is obtained by refining bauxite, which is red since it contains 30 to 40 iron oxide. This is done using the so called Bayer process. Previously, the Deville process was the predominant refining technology.
The electrolytic process replaced the W hler process, which involved the reduction of anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium. Both of the electrodes used in the electrolysis of aluminium oxide are carbon. Once the ore is in the molten state, its ions are free to move around. The reaction at the negative cathode is
:Alsup3 sup 3 esup sup Al
Here the aluminium ion is being reduced (electrons are added). The aluminium metal then sinks to the bottom and is tapped off.
At the positive electrode (anode) oxygen gas is formed:
:2 Osup2 sup Osub2 sub 4 esup sup
This carbon anode is then oxidised by the oxygen. The anodes in a reduction must therefore be replaced regularly, since they are consumed in the process:
:Osub2 sub C COsub2 sub
Contrary to the anodes, the cathodes are not consumed during the operation, since there is no oxygen present at the cathode. The carbon cathode is protected by the liquid aluminium inside the cells. Cathodes do erode, mainly due to electrochemical processes. After 5 to 10 years, depending on the current used in the electrolysis, a cell has to be reconstructed completely, because the cathodes are completely worn.
Aluminium electrolysis with the Hall H roult process consumes a lot of energy, but alternative processes were always found to be less viable economically and or ecologically. The world wide average specific energy consumption is approximately 15 0.5 kilowatt hours per kilogram of aluminium produced (52 to 56 MJ kg). The most modern smelters reach approximately 12.8 kW h kg (46.1 MJ kg). Reduction line current for older technologies are typically 100 to 200 kA. State of the art smelters operate with about 350 kA. Trials have been reported with 500 kA cells.
Electric power represents about 20 to 40 of the cost of producing aluminium, depending on the location of the aluminium smelter. Smelters tend to be located where electric power is plentiful and inexpensive, such as South Africa, the South Island of New Zealand, Australia, China, Middle East, Russia, Iceland and Quebec in Canada.
In 2004, China was the top world producer of aluminium. Suriname depends on aluminium exports for 70 of its export earnings.
see also :category:Aluminium minerals
Isotopes
Aluminium has nine isotopes, whose mass numbers range from 23 to 30. Only sup27 supAl (stable isotope) and sup26 supAl (radioactive isotope, ''t''sub1 2 sub 7.2 10sup5 sup y) occur naturally, however sup27 supAl has a natural abundance of 100 . sup26 supAl is produced from argon in the atmosphere by spallation caused by cosmic ray protons. Aluminium isotopes have found practical application in dating marine sediments, manganese nodules, glacial ice, quartz in rock exposures, and meteorites. The ratio of sup26 supAl to sup10 supBe has been used to study the role of transport, deposition, sediment storage, burial times, and erosion on 10sup5 sup to 10sup6 sup year time scales.
Cosmogenic sup26 supAl was first applied in studies of the Moon and meteorites. Meteorite fragments, after departure from their parent bodies, are exposed to intense cosmic ray bombardment during their travel through space, causing substantial sup26 supAl production. After falling to Earth, atmospheric shielding protects the meteorite fragments from further sup26 supAl production, and its decay can then be used to determine the meteorite's terrestrial age. Meteorite research has also shown that sup26 supAl was relatively abundant at the time of formation of our planetary system. Possibly, the energy released by the decay of sup26 supAl was responsible for the remelting and differentiation of some asteroids after their formation 4.6 billion years ago.
Clusters
In the journal ''Science'' of 14 January 2005 it was reported that clusters of 13 aluminium atoms (Alsub13 sub) had been made to behave like an iodine atom and, 14 aluminium atoms (Alsub14 sub) behaved like an alkaline earth atom. The researchers also bound 12 iodine atoms to an Alsub13 sub cluster to form a new class of polyiodide. This discovery is reported to give rise to the possibility of a new characterisation of the periodic table: superatoms. The research teams were led by Shiv N. Khanna (Virginia Commonwealth University) and A. Welford Castleman Jr (Penn State University).
Precautions
Aluminium is one of the few abundant elements that appears to have no beneficial function in living cells, but a few percent of people are allergic to it they experience contact dermatitis from any form of it: an itchy rash from using styptic or antiperspirant products, digestive disorders and inability to absorb nutrients from eating food cooked in aluminium pans, and vomiting and other symptoms of poisoning from ingesting such products as Rolaids , Amphojel, and Maalox (antacids). In other people, aluminium is not considered as toxic as heavy metals, but there is evidence of some toxicity if it is consumed in excessive amounts, although the use of aluminium cookware, popular because of its corrosion resistance and good heat conduction, has not been shown to lead to aluminium toxicity in general. Excessive consumption of antacids containing aluminium compounds and excessive use of aluminium containing antiperspirants are more likely causes of toxicity. It has been suggested that aluminium may be linked to Alzheimer's disease, although that research has recently been refuted aluminium accumulation may be a consequence of the Alzheimer's damage, not the cause. In any event, if there is any toxicity of aluminium it must be via a very specific mechanism, since total human exposure to the element in the form of naturally occurring clay in soil and dust is enormously large over a lifetime.
Care must be taken to prevent aluminium from coming into contact with certain chemicals that can cause it to corrode quickly. For example, just a small amount of mercury applied to the surface of a piece of aluminium can break up the aluminium oxide barrier usually present. Within a few hours, even a heavy structural beam can be significantly weakened. For this reason, mercury thermometers are not allowed on many airliners, as aluminium is a common structural component in aircraft.
Spelling
Etymology Nomenclature history
In 1808, Humphry Davy originally proposed the name ''alumium'' while trying to isolate the new metal electrolytically from the mineral ''alumina''. In 1812 he changed the name to ''aluminum'' to match its Latin root. The same year, an anonymous contributor to the ''Quarterly Review'' objected to ''aluminum'', and proposed the name ''aluminium''.
blockquote
Aluminium, for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound. (Q. Review VIII. 72, 1812)
blockquote
This had the advantage of conforming to the ium suffix precedent set by other newly discovered elements of the period: potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium, and strontium (all of which Davy had isolated himself). Nevertheless, um spellings for elements were not unknown at the time: platinum, which had been known to Europeans since the 16th century, molybdenum, which was discovered in 1778, and tantalum, which was discovered in 1802, all have spellings ending in um.
The United States adopted the ium for most of the 19th century with ''aluminium'' appearing in Webster's Dictionary of 1828. However in 1892 Charles Martin Hall used the um spelling in an advertising handbill for his new efficient electrolytic method for the production of aluminium, despite using the ium spelling in all of his patents filed between 1886 and 1903. It has consequently been suggested that the spelling on the flyer was a simple spelling mistake rather than a deliberate choice to use the um spelling. Hall's domination of production of the metal ensured that the spelling ''aluminum'' became the standard in North America, even though the ''Webster Unabridged Dictionary'' of 1913 continued to use the ium version.
In 1926, the American Chemical Society officially decided to use ''aluminum'' in its publications, and American dictionaries typically label the spelling ''aluminium'' as a British variant.
Present day spelling
In the English speaking world, the spellings (and associated pronunciations) ''aluminium'' and ''aluminum'' are both in common use in scientific and nonscientific contexts. In the United States, the spelling ''aluminium'' is largely unknown, and the spelling ''aluminum'' predominates. Elsewhere in the English speaking world the spelling ''aluminium'' predominates, and the spelling ''aluminum'' is largely unknown. However, in Canada both spellings are common, due to the multiple influences on the language of its proximity to the United States, its British colonial past and the large number of native French speakers.
Outside English, the "ium" spelling is widespread: the word is ''aluminium'' in French, ''Aluminium'' in German, and identical or similar forms are used in many other languages. Consequently it is the more common of the two spellings in global terms, even though there may be more users of ''aluminum'' in the English speaking world.
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted ''aluminium'' as the standard international name for the element in 1990, but three years later recognised ''aluminum'' as an acceptable variant. Hence their periodic table includes both, but places aluminium first
Chemistry
Oxidation state 1
AlH is produced when aluminium is heated at 1500 C in an atmosphere of hydrogen.
Alsub2 subO is made by heating the normal oxide, Alsub2 subOsub3 sub, with silicon at 1800 C in a vacuum.
Alsub2 subS can be made by heating Alsub2 subSsub3 sub with aluminium shavings at 1300 C in a vacuum. It quickly disproportionates to the starting materials. The selenide is made in a parallel manner.
AlF, AlCl and AlBr exist in the gaseous phase when the tri halide is heated with aluminium.
Oxidation state 2
Aluminium suboxide, AlO can be shown to be present when aluminium powder burns in oxygen.
Oxidation state 3
Fajans rules show that the simple trivalent cation Alsup3 sup is not expected to be found in anhydrous salts or binary compounds such as Alsub2 subOsub3 sub. The hydroxide is a weak base and aluminium salts of weak bases, such as carbonate, can't be prepared. The salts of strong acids, such as nitrate, are stable and soluble in water, forming hydrates with at least six molecules of water of crystallization.
Aluminium hydride, (AlHsub3 sub)subn sub, can be produced from trimethylaluminium and an excess of hydrogen. It burns explosively in air. It can also be prepared by the action of aluminium chloride on lithium hydride in ether solution, but cannot be isolated free from the solvent.
Aluminium carbide, Alsub4 subCsub3 sub is made by heating a mixture of the elements above 1000 C. The pale yellow crystals have a complex lattice structure, and react with water or dilute acids to give methane. The acetylide, Alsub2 sub(Csub2 sub)sub3 sub, is made by passing acetylene over heated aluminium.
Aluminium nitride, AlN, can be made from the elements at 800 C. It is hydrolysed by water to form ammonia and aluminium hydroxide.
Aluminium phosphide, AlP, is made similarly, and hydrolyses to give phosphine.
Aluminium oxide, Alsub2 subOsub3 sub, occurs naturally as corundum, and can be made by burning aluminium in oxygen or by heating the hydroxide, nitrate or sulfate. As a gemstone, its hardness is only exceeded by diamond, boron nitride and carborundum. It is almost insoluble in water.
Aluminium hydroxide may be prepared as a gelatinous precipitate by adding ammonia to an aqueous solution of an aluminium salt. It is amphoteric, being both a very weak acid, and forming aluminates with alkalis. It exists in various crystalline forms.
Aluminium sulfide, Alsub2 subSsub3 sub, may be prepared by passing hydrogen sulfide over aluminium powder. It is polymorphic.
Aluminium fluoride, AlFsub3 sub, is made by treating the hydroxide with HF, or can be made from the elements. It consists of a giant molecule which sublimes without melting at 1291 C. It is very inert. The other trihalides are dimeric, having a bridge like structure.
Organo metallic compounds of empirical formula AlRsub3 sub exist and, if not also giant molecules, are at least dimers or trimers. They have some uses in organic synthesis, for instance trimethylaluminium.
Alumino hydrides of the most electropositive elements are known, the most useful being lithium aluminium hydride, Li AlHsub4 sub . It decomposes into lithium hydride, aluminium and hydrogen when heated, and is hydrolysed by water. It has many uses in organic chemistry, particularly as a reducing agent. The aluminohalides have a similar structure.
Aluminium in popular culture
In the film ''Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home'', Scotty devises the fictional material transparent aluminum.
See also
Alloys of aluminium.
References
references
A history of the spelling of aluminium from a British viewpoint.
Oxford English Dictionary Entries "aluminum" and "aluminium", available by subscription.
External links
'''Patents'''
US ''Process of reducing aluminum from its floride salts by electrolysis'' C. M. Hall
Category:Chemical elements
Category:Poor metals
Category:Inorganic pigments
Category:Pyrotechnic chemicals
Category:Rocket fuels
Category:Structural engineering
af:Aluminium
ar:
bs:Aluminijum
ca:Alumini
cs:Hlin k
cy:Alwminiwm
da:Aluminium
de:Aluminium
et:Alumiinium
es:Aluminio
eo:Aluminio
fr:Aluminium
gd:Alman
gl:Aluminio (elemento)
ko:
hr:Aluminij
io:Aluminio
id:Aluminium
is: l
it:Alluminio
he:
ku:Baf n
la:Aluminium
lv:Alum nijs
lt:Aliuminis
lb:Aluminium
hu:Alum nium
mi:Konumohe
nl:Aluminium
ja:
no:Aluminium
nn:Aluminium
pl:Glin
pt:Alum nio
ru:
simple:Aluminium
sl:Aluminij
sr:
fi:Alumiini
sv:Aluminium
th:
vi:Nh m
uk:
zh:
'''Advanced Chemistry''' are a German hip hop band from Heidelberg. Members include Toni L, Linguist, Torch affiliated: Boulevard Bou.
Discography
1992 Fremd im eigenen Land (12" MCD, MZEE)
1993 Welcher Pfad f hrt zur Geschichte (12" MCD, MZEE)
1994 Operation 3 (12" MCD)
1994 Dir fehlt der Funk! (12" MCD)
1995 Advanced Chemistry (2xLP CD)
Category:Hip hop groups
Category:German musical groups
als:Advanced Chemistry
de:Advanced Chemistry
'''Abdication''' (from the Latin ''abdicatio'', disowning, renouncing, from ''ab'', from, and ''dicare'', to declare, to proclaim as not belonging to one) is the act of renouncing and resigning from a formal office, especially from the supreme office of state. (In Roman law the term was also applied to the disowning of a family member, as the disinheriting of a son.) A similar term for an elected or appointed official is resignation.
Abdications in Classical Antiquity
Among the most memorable abdications of antiquity were those of Lucius Cornelius Sulla the Dictator in 79 BC, Emperor Diocletian in AD 305, and Emperor Romulus Augustus in AD 476.
The British Crown
Probably the most famous abdication in recent memory is that of King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom in 1936. Edward abdicated the British throne in order to marry American divorc e Wallis Simpson, over the objections of the British establishment, the governments of the Commonwealth, the royal family and the Church of England. (''See'' Abdication Crisis of Edward VIII.) This was also the first time in history that the British crown was surrendered entirely voluntarily. Richard II of England, for example, was forced to abdicate after the throne was seized by his cousin, Henry Bolingbroke, while Richard was out of the country.
When James II of England, after throwing the Great Seal of the Realm into the Thames, fled to France in 1688, he did not formally resign the crown, and the question was discussed in Parliament whether he had forfeited the throne or had abdicated. The latter designation was agreed upon, for in a full assembly of the Lords and Commons, met in convention, it was resolved in spite of James's protest "''that King James II having endeavoured to subvert the constitution of the kingdom, by breaking the original contract between king and people, and, by the advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having violated the fundamental laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this kingdom, has abdicated the government, and that the throne is thereby vacant.''" The Scottish parliament pronounced a decree of forfeiture and deposition.
Because the title to the Crown depends upon statute, particularly the Act of Settlement 1701, a Royal Abdication can only be effected by an Act of Parliament. To give legal effect to the abdication of King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom, His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936 was passed.
Modern abdications
Historically, if a monarch abdicated it was seen as a profound and shocking abandonment of royal duty. As a result, abdications usually only occurred in the most extreme circumstances of political turmoil or violence. This has changed in a small number of countries: the monarchs of the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Cambodia have abdicated as a result of old age. Prince Hans Adam II of Liechtenstein recently made his son regent, an act which amounted to an abdication in fact if not in law.
List
The following is a list of the important abdications:
border "0" cellpadding "0"
align "left" Lucius Cornelius Sulla
align "right" 79 BC
align "left" Diocletian align "right" AD 305
align "left" Pope Benedict IX
align "right" 1048
align "left" Isaac I Comnenus align "right" 1059
align "left" Emperor Huizong of Song China
align "right" January 18, 1126
align "left" Stephen II of Hungary
align "right" 1131
align "left" Albert I of Brandenburg
align "right" 1169
align "left" Ladislaus III of Poland
align "right" 1206
align "left" Pope Celestine V
align "right" December 13, 1294
align "left" John Baliol of Scotland
align "right" 1296
align "left" John Cantacuzene, emperor of the East
align "right" 1355
align "left" Richard II of England
align "right" September 29, 1399
align "left" Baldassare Cossa, Antipope John XXIII
align "right" 1415
align "left" Eric VII of Denmark or Erik XIII of Sweden
align "right" 1439
align "left" Amadeus VIII of Savoy
align "right" 1440
align "left" Murad II, Ottoman Sultan
align "right" 1444 and 1445
align "left" Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor sup1 sup
align "right" 1555 1556
align "left" Christina of Sweden
align "right" June 6, 1654
align "left" Mary Queen of Scots
align "right" July 24, 1567
align "left" John Casimir of Poland
align "right" 1668
align "left" James II of England
align "right" 1688
align "left" Frederick Augustus of Poland
align "right" 1706
align "left" Philip V of Spain
align "right" 1724
align "left" Victor Amadeus of Sardinia
align "right" 1730
align "left" Ahmed III, Ottoman Sultan
align "right" 1730
align "left" Charles of Naples (on accession to throne of Spain)
align "right" 1759
align "left" Stanislaus II of Poland
align "right" 1795
align "left" Qianlong Emperor of China
align "right" February 9, 1796
align "left" Charles Emanuel IV of Sardinia
align "right" June 4, 1802
align "left" Charles IV of Spain
align "right" March 19, 1808
align "left" Joseph Bonaparte of Naples
align "right" June 6, 1808
align "left" Gustav IV of Sweden
align "right" March 29, 1809
align "left" Louis Bonaparte of Holland
align "right" July 2, 1810
align "left" Napoleon I, French Emperor
align "right" April 4, 1814, and June 22, 1815
align "left" Victor Emanuel of Sardinia
align "right" March 13, 1821
align "left" Charles X of France
align "right" August 2, 1830
align "left" Pedro IV of Portugal sup2 sup
align "right" May 28, 1826
align "left" Pedro I of Brazil sup2 sup
align "right" April 7, 1831
align "left" Miguel of Portugal
align "right" May 26, 1834
align "left" William I of the Netherlands
align "right" October 7, 1840
align "left" Louis Philippe, King of the French
align "right" February 24, 1848
align "left" Louis Charles of Bavaria
align "right" March 21, 1848
align "left" Ferdinand of Austria
align "right" December 2, 1848
align "left" Charles Albert of Sardinia
align "right" March 23, 1849
align "left" Leopold II of Tuscany
align "right" July 21, 1859
align "left" Isabella II of Spain
align "right" June 25, 1870
align "left" Amadeus I of Spain
align "right" February 11, 1873
align "left" Alexander of Bulgaria
align "right" September 7, 1886
align "left" Milan of Serbia
align "right" March 6, 1889
align "left" Liliuokalani of Hawaii
align "right" January 17, 1893 (monarchy abolished)
align "left" Xuantong Emperor of China
align "right" February 12, 1912 (monarchy abolished)
align "left" Nicholas II of Russia
align "right" March 15, 1917 (monarchy abolished)
align "left" Wilhelm II of Germany
align "right" November 9, 1918 (monarchy abolished)
align "left" Prajadhipok of Siam
align "right" March 2, 1935
align "left" Edward VIII of the United Kingdom
align "right" December 11, 1936
align "left" Carol II of Romania
align "right" September 6, 1940
align "left" Victor Emmanuel III of Italy
align "right" May 9, 1946
align "left" Wilhelmina of the Netherlands
align "right" September 4, 1948
align "left" L opold III, King of the Belgians
align "right" July 16, 1951
align "left" Farouk I of Egypt
align "right" July 26, 1952
align "left" Fuad II of Egypt
align "right" June 18, 1953 (Monarchy abolished)
align "left" Juliana of the Netherlands
align "right" April 30, 1980
align "left" Jean of Luxembourg
align "right" October 7, 2000
align "left" Hans Adam II of Liechtensteinsup3 sup
align "right" August 15, 2004 (Made his son regent)
align "left" Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia
align "right" October 7, 2004
align "left" Saad Al Abdullah Al Salim Al Sabah of Kuwait
align "right" January 23, 2006
Notes
sup1 supCharles abdicated as lord of the Netherlands (October 25, 1555) and king of Spain (January 16, 1556), in favor of his son Philip II of Spain. Also in 1556 he separately voluntarily abdicated his German possessions and the title of Holy Roman Emperor.br
sup2 supPedro IV of Portugal and Pedro I of Brazil were the same person. He was already Emperor of Brazil when he succeeded to the throne of Portugal in 1826, but abdicated it at once in favour of his daughter Maria II of Portugal. Later he abdicated the throne of Brazil in favor of his son Pedro II. br
sup3 supHans Adam II made his son Alois regent, effectively abdicating however, he still remains the formal Head of State.
See also
Lists of incumbents
List of monarchs who lost their thrones or abdicated in the 20th century
Papal abdication
The Great Abdication
References
Public domain 1911 edition of ''The New Century Book of Facts'' published by the King Richardson Company, Springfield, Massachusetts.
Category:Monarchy
bg:
de:Abdikation
eo:Abdiko
es:Abdicaci n
fr:Abdication
hr:Abdikacija
nl:Abdicatie
no:Abdikasjon
pl:Abdykacja
ru:
sv:Abdikation
as its symbol, signifying its worldwide reach and decentralized nature. It is surmounted, like ecclesiastical coats of arms, by a bishop's mitre in the center is a cross of St. George recalling the communion's origins in the Church of England. The Greek motto, ("The truth will set you free") is a quotation from John 8:32.
The '''Anglican Communion''' is a world wide organisation of Anglican Churches. There is no single "Anglican Church" since each national or regional church has full autonomy as the name suggests, rather, the Anglican ''Communion'' is an association of these churches in full communion with each other and particularly with the Church of England, which may be regarded as the "mother church" of the worldwide communion.
As a result, all rites conducted in one member church are recognised by the others. Some of these churches are known as Anglican, explicitly recognising the link to England others, such as the American and Scottish Episcopal churches, or the Church of Ireland, prefer a specific name. Each church has its own doctrine and liturgy, based in most cases on that of the Church of England and each church has its own legislative process and overall episcopal leadership from a local primate. The Archbishop of Canterbury, religious head of the Church of England, has no formal authority outside that country but is recognised as a symbolic head for the worldwide communion. Among the other primates, he is ''primus inter pares'', or "first among equals." If the Archbishop of Canterbury is compared with other religious leaders such as the Pope, therefore, it is only because of his prominent figurehead role in the media. He has no formal authority outside his own province.
Although they are not considered members, some non Anglican bodies have entered into communion with the Anglican Communion despite having non Anglican origins and traditions. There are also a number of Anglican type bodies which separated from a member church of the Anglican Communion and thus are no longer in communion with the Church of England. They tend to call themselves "continuing churches."
What holds the Communion together?
The Anglican Communion has no official legal existence nor any formal governing structure. (There is an "Anglican Communion Office" in London, under the aegis of the Archbishop of Canterbury but it serves merely a supporting and organisational role.) Some have asked what holds the communion together.
The first attempt at an answer was the Chicago Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888. Proposed by the American Episcopal Church in 1886 and adopted by the Lambeth Conference of 1888, it set out four principles for future Christian unity. Although wider union has not followed, the quadrilateral has been useful within the communion itself.
The quadrilateral, according to the wording adopted in Lambeth (), consists of:
"The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, as 'containing all things necessary to salvation', and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith."
"The Apostles' Creed, as the Baptismal Symbol and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the Christian faith."
"The two Sacraments ordained by Christ Himself Baptism and the Supper of the Lord ministered with unfailing use of Christ's words of Institution, and of the elements ordained by Him."
"The Historic Episcopate, locally adapted in the methods of its administration to the varying needs of the nations and peoples called of God into the Unity of His Church."
This, then, is the theoretical basis for unity. But what holds it together organisationally? In the last few years people have began to refer to four "Instruments of Unity", which are effectively symbols to which all the churches of the communion can feel tied. In order of antiquity, they are:
The Archbishop of Canterbury (''ab origine'')
The Lambeth Conference (first held in 1867)
The Anglican Consultative Council (first met in 1971)
The Primates' Meeting (first met in 1979)
Since each province is legally independent and free to chart its own course, the stress on these instruments of unity can easily be imagined. In recent years, for example, some Anglicans (particularly in Africa and Asia) have been displeased with the American and Canadian branches, upset by their welcoming attitudes towards homosexuals, and by the confident way the changes have been made the conservatives condemned the action as unilateral and called for wider consultation within the communion before such steps were taken. After the North American churches reaffirmed their belief that their actions had been righteous and "prophetic", they were asked to withdraw their delegates from the 2005 meeting of the Anglican Consultative Council, although it is not clear under whose authority or by what law. They were eventually permitted at the meeting with voice, but no vote. They have not been expelled or suspended from the ''communion'' indeed, no church ever has. It is unclear how such an expulsion could ever be carried out, since the communion is not a disciplinary entity but a spiritual construct based entirely on the New Testament concept of koinonia.
Provinces of the Anglican Communion
The term "province" in this context refers to national churches, many of which themselves contain several provinces in the sense of groups of dioceses presided over by an archbishop. According to the Secretariat of the Anglican Communion, currently the member churches of the Anglican Communion are as follows:
The Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
The Anglican Church of Australia
The Church of Bangladesh
The Episcopal Anglican Church of Brazil
The Anglican Church of Burundi
The Anglican Church of Canada
The Church of the Province of Central Africa
The Anglican Church in the Central Region of America
The Church of the Province of the Congo
The Church of England
Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui
The Church of the Province of the Indian Ocean
The Church of Ireland
The Nippon Sei Ko Kai (The Anglican Communion in Japan)
The Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and The Middle East
The Anglican Church of Kenya
The Anglican Church of Korea
The Church of the Province of Melanesia
The Anglican Church of Mexico
The Church of the Province of Myanmar (Burma)
The Church of Nigeria
The Church of North India
The Church of Pakistan
The Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea
The Episcopal Church in the Philippines
The Episcopal Church of Rwanda
The Scottish Episcopal Church
Church of the Province of South East Asia
The Church of South India
The Church of the Province of Southern Africa
The Anglican Church of the Southern Cone of the Americas
The Episcopal Church of the Sudan
The Anglican Church of Tanzania
The Church of the Province of Uganda
The Episcopal Church in the United States of America
The Church in Wales
The Church of the Province of West Africa
The Church in the Province of the West Indies
The Church of Ceylon (Extra Provincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
The Episcopal Church of Cuba
Bermuda (Extra Provincial to Canterbury)
The Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church of Portugal (Extra Provincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
The Reformed Episcopal Church of Spain (Extra Provincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury)
Falkland Islands (Extra Provincial to Canterbury)
History
''Main article: see History of the Anglican Communion''
The Anglican Communion is a relatively recent concept. Ever since the Church of England (which until the 20th century included the Church in Wales) broke from Rome in the reign of Henry VIII, it has thought of itself not as a new foundation but rather as a reformed continuation of the ancient "English church" and a reassertion of that church's rights. As such it was a distinctly local phenomenon.
Thus the only members of the present Anglican Communion existing by the late 18th century were the Church of England, its closely linked sister church, the Church of Ireland (which also broke from Rome under Henry VIII), and the Scottish Episcopal Church, which for parts of the 17th and 18th centuries was partially underground (it was suspected of Jacobite sympathies).
However, the enormous expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries of the British Empire brought the church along with it. At first all these colonial churches were under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. After the American Revolution, the parishes in the newly independent country found it necessary to break formally from a church whose earthly head was (and remains) the British monarch. Thus they formed their own dioceses and national church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, in a mostly amicable separation.
At about the same time, in the colonies which remained linked to the crown, the Church of England began to appoint colonial bishops. In 1787 a bishop of Nova Scotia was appointed with a jurisdiction over all of British North America in time several more colleagues were appointed to other cities in present day Canada. In 1814 a bishop of Calcutta was made in 1824 the first bishop was sent to the West Indies and in 1836 to Australia. By 1840 there were still only ten colonial bishops for the Church of England but even this small beginning greatly facilitated the growth of Anglicanism around the world. In 1841 a "Colonial Bishoprics Council" was set up and soon many more dioceses were created.
In time, it became natural to group these into provinces, and a metropolitan appointed for each province. Although it had at first been somewhat established in many colonies, in 1861 it was ruled that, except where specifically established, the Church of England had just the same legal position as any other church. Thus a colonial bishop and colonial diocese was by nature quite a different thing from their counterparts back home. In time bishops came to be appointed locally rather than from England, and eventually national synods began to pass ecclesiastical legislation independent of England.
A crucial step in the development of the modern communion was the idea of the Lambeth Conferences. In 1867, at the suggestion of the Canadian synod, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Thomas Langley, invited a great conference of bishops to meet with him at Lambeth Palace. By inviting the bishops of the Churches of England and Ireland, those of the semi autonomous colonial churches, and those of the fully autonomous Episcopal Church in the United States of America, he set a precedent that they all could meet together despite the absence of universal legal ties. Some bishops were initially reluctant to attend, fearing that the meeting would declare itself a council with power to legislate for the church but it agreed to pass only advisory resolutions. These Lambeth Conferences have been held decennially since 1878 (the second such conference), and remain the most visible coming together of the whole communion.
Recent controversies
Recent disagreements over homosexuality have strained the unity of the communion as well as its relationships with other Christian denominations see Anglican views of homosexuality.
Relationship with the Roman Catholic Church
Efforts have been underway at least since 1966 to effect a reconciliation with the Roman Catholic Church, focusing on theological issues
See also
Thirty Nine Articles
Book of Common Prayer
Anglican Use
Anglican Communion Network
Affirming Catholicism
Sydney Anglicans
External links
Category:Anglicanism
Category:Christian group structuring
de:Anglikanische Kommunion
fr:Communion anglicane
he:
ja:
it:Comunione anglicana
nl:Anglicaanse Kerk
sh:Anglikanska crkva
sr:
sv:Anglikanska kyrkogemenskapen
vi:Anh gi o
zh:
'''Arne Kaijser''' (born 1950) is a professor of History of Technology at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and the head of the university's department of History of science and technology.
Kaijser has published two books in Swedish: ''Stadens ljus. Etableringen av de f rsta svenska gasverken'' and ''I f drens sp r. Den svenska infrastrukturens historiska utveckling och framtida utmaningar'', and has co edited several anthologies. Kaijser is also a member of the editorial board of two scientific journals: ''Journal of Urban Technology'' and ''Centaurus''. Lately, he has been occupied with the history of Large Technical Systems.
External links
Kaijser, Arne
Kaijser, Arne
Kaijser, Arne
An '''archipelago''' is a landform which consists of a chain or cluster of islands. Archipelagoes usually occur in the open sea less commonly a large land mass may neighbour them. Archipelagoes are often volcanic, forming along ocean ridges or hotspots, but there are many other processes involved in their construction, including erosion and deposition.
The word comes from the Aegean Sea (Greek '''', Italian ''Arcipelago''), which literally means "chief sea", from Greek ''arkhi'' (leader) and ''pelagos'' (sea). The Aegean Sea is located between Greece in the west and Turkey in the east. In the Aegean, the Venetian Dukes of the Archipelago ruled from Naxos, 12101566.
The Archipelago Exchange is a fully electronic stock exchange that agreed to merge with the New York Stock Exchange in April 2005 to form the for profit NYSE Group.
List of archipelagoes
ABC islands
Aegean islands
Cyclades
Dodecanese
Aleutian Islands
Alexander Archipelago
Andaman Islands
Antilles (West Indies)
Greater Antilles
Puerto Rican Islands
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Windward Islands
Azores
Bahama Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
Balearic Islands
Baltic Sea archipelagoes
Stockholm archipelago
Turku archipelago
land Islands
Bermuda Islands
Bight of Bonny islands
British Isles
Channel Islands
Hebrides
Isles of Scilly
Orkney Islands
Shetland Islands
Canadian Arctic islands
Belcher Islands
Queen Elizabeth Islands
Chagos Archipelago
Channel Islands of California
Chausey
Chonos Archipelago
Comoro Islands
Diego Ram rez Islands
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
Faroe Islands
Florida Keys
Fox Islands
Franz Josef Land
Frisian Islands (or Wadden Islands)
East Frisian Islands
North Frisian Islands
West Frisian Islands
Furneaux Group
Gal pagos Islands (Col n
Gothenburg archipelago
Guayaneco Archipelago
Japanese Archipelago
Juan Fern ndez Islands
Kerguelen Islands
Kermadec Islands
Kornati
Lakshadweep (Laccadives)
Lofoten
Los Roques
Macaronesia
Canary Islands
Cape Verde Islands
Barlavento
Sotavento
Madeira Islands
Magdalen Islands
Malay archipelago (the world's largest)
Maluku Islands
Philippine Islands
Luzon Group
Mindanao Group
Sulu Archipelago
Visayas
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands
Maldives
Maltese islands
Mascarene Islands
Seychelles Islands
Aldabra Group
Amirante Islands
Farquhar Group
Melanesia
Bismarck Archipelago
Fiji Islands
New Caledonia (Kanaky)
Loyalty Islands
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu (New Hebrides)
Mergui Archipelago
Micronesia
Caroline Islands
Gilbert Islands (Kiribati)
Line Islands
Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Ralik Chain
Ratak Chain
Palau
Phoenix Islands
New Siberian Islands
Nicobar Islands
New England and New York islands (Manhattan, City Island, Long Island, Rikers Island, Roosevelt Island, Staten Island, Block Island, Nantucket, Martha's Vineyard, Liberty Island, Ellis Island, Governors Island, Long Beach Island, Elizabeth Islands)
Novaya Zemlya islands
Polynesia
Cook Islands (Hervey Islands)
French Polynesia
Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas
Society Islands
les du vent (Windward Islands)
les sous le vent (Leeward Islands)
Tuamotus
Hawaiian Islands (Sandwich Islands)
New Zealand islands (Aotearoa)
Pitcairn Islands
Samoan Islands (Navigators' Islands)
American Samoa (Eastern Samoa)
Samoa (Western Samoa)
Tonga Islands (Friendly Islands)
Tokelau (Union Islands)
Tuvalu (Ellice Islands)
Wallis and Futuna Islands
Horne Islands
Pontine Islands
Queen Charlotte Islands (Haida Gwaii)
Saint Helena islands
San Juan Islands
Severnaya Zemlya
Solentiname Islands
South China Sea Islands
Paracel Islands
Spratly Islands
South Orkney Islands
South Sandwich Islands
South Shetland Islands
Svalbard
Thousand Islands
Tierra del Fuego
"The World", an archipelago of artificial islands being constructed off Dubai
Tuscan Archipelago
Venice islands
Virgin Islands
See also
Island arc
Geography
Earth science
Geomorphology
List of landforms
Plate tectonics
Lists of islands:
List of islands of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
List of islands in the Arctic Ocean
List of islands of Asia
List of islands in the Atlantic Ocean
List of islands of Australia
List of islands of Canada
List of islands in the Caribbean
List of islands in the Indian Ocean
List of islands of New Zealand
List of islands of North America
List of islands in the Pacific
List of islands of South America
List of islands in the United States
an:Archipielago
ar:
bg:
da:Arkipelag
de:Archipel
et:Saarestik
es:Archipi lago
fr:Archipel
gl:Arquip lago
io:Archipelago
id:Kepulauan
is:Eyjaklasi
it:Arcipelago
ko:
he:
nl:Archipel
ja:
pl:Archipelag
pt:Arquip lago
ru:
fi:Saaristo
sv:Sk rg rd
tl:Kapuluan
zh:
REDIRECT Ann Arbor, Michigan
'''Sir Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle''' (May 22 1859 July 7 1930) was a Scottish author most famously known for his stories about the detective Sherlock Holmes, which are generally considered a major innovation in the field of crime fiction. He was a prolific writer whose other works include science fiction stories, historical novels, plays and romances, poetry, and non fiction.
Conan was originally a middle name but he used it as part of his surname in his later years.
Life
Arthur Conan Doyle was born in 1859 in Edinburgh to Charles and Mary Doyle. He was sent to the Jesuit preparatory school Stonyhurst at the age of nine, and by the time he left the school in 1875 he rejected Christianity to become an agnostic. From 1876 to 1881 he studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, including a period working in the town of Aston (now a district of Birmingham). Following his term at University he served as a ship's doctor on a voyage to the West African coast, and then in 1882 he set up a practice in Plymouth. He achieved his doctorate in 1885. His medical practice was unsuccessful while waiting for patients he began writing stories. His first literary experience came in ''Chambers's Edinburgh Journal'' before he was 20.
It was only after he subsequently moved his practice to Southsea that he began to indulge more extensively in literature. His first significant work was ''A Study in Scarlet'' which appeared in ''Beeton's Christmas Annual'' for 1887 and featured the first appearance of Sherlock Holmes who was modelled after Doyle's former University professor, Joseph Bell. Interestingly, Rudyard Kipling congratulated Doyle on his success, asking "Could this be my old friend, Dr. Joe?". While living in Southsea he helped form Portsmouth Football Club and played as the club's first goalkeeper.
In 1885 he married Louise Hawkins, who suffered from tuberculosis and eventually died in 1906. He married Jean Leckie in 1907, whom he had first met and fallen in love with in 1897 but had maintained a platonic relationship with her out of loyalty to his first wife. Doyle had five children, two with his first wife (Mary and Kingsley), and three with his second wife (Jean, Denis, and Adrian).
In 1890 Doyle studied the eye in Vienna, and in 1891 moved to London to set up a practice as an oculist. This also gave him more time for writing, and in November 1891 he wrote to his mother: "I think of slaying Holmes... and winding him up for good and all. He takes my mind from better things." In December 1893, he did so in order to dedicate more of his time to more "important" works (namely his historical novels), pitting Holmes against his arch nemesis Professor Moriarty. They apparently plunged to their deaths together down a waterfall in the story "The Final Problem". Public outcry led him to bring the character backDoyle returned to the story in "The Adventure of the Empty House", with the ingenious explanation that only Moriarty had fallen, but, since Holmes had other dangerous enemies, he had arranged to be temporarily "dead" also. Holmes eventually appears in a total of 56 short stories and four Doyle novels (he has since appeared in many novels and stories by other authors).
Following the Boer War in South Africa at the turn of the 20th century and the condemnation from around the world over Britain's conduct, Doyle wrote a short pamphlet titled ''The War in South Africa: Its Cause and Conduct'' which justified Britain's role in the Boer war and was widely translated. Doyle believed that it was this pamphlet that resulted in his being knighted and appointed as Deputy Lieutenant of Surrey in 1902. He also wrote the longer book ''The Great Boer War'' in 1900. During the early years of the 20th century Sir Arthur twice ran for Parliament as a Liberal Unionist, once in Edinburgh and once in the Border Burghs, but although he received a respectable vote he was not elected.
Conan Doyle was involved in the campaign for the reform of the Congo Free State, led by the journalist E. D. Morel and the diplomat Roger Casement. He wrote The Crime of the Congo in 1909, a long pamphlet in which he denounced the horrors in Congo. He become acquainted with Morel and Casement, taking inspiration from them for two of the main characters of the novel The Lost World (1912). He broke with both when Morel (who was rather left wing) became one of the leaders of the pacifist movement during the First World War, and Casement committed treason against Britain out of conviction for his Irish nationalist views. Doyle tried, unsuccessfully, to save Casement from the death penalty, arguing that he had been driven mad and was not responsible for his actions.
Doyle was also a fervent advocate of justice, and personally investigated two closed cases, which led to two imprisoned men being released. The first case, in 1906, involved a shy half British, half Indian lawyer named George Edalji, who had allegedly penned threatening letters and mutilated animals. Police were dead set on Edalji's conviction, even though the mutilations continued even after their suspect was jailed. It was partially as a result of this case that the Court of Criminal Appeal was established in 1907, so not only did Conan Doyle help George Edalji, his work helped to establish a way to correct other miscarriages of justice. The story of Conan Doyle and Edalji is told in fictional form in Julian Barnes's 2005 novel, Arthur George.
The second casethat of Oscar Slater, a German Jew and gambling den operator convicted of bludgeoning an 82 year old woman in Glasgow in 1908excited Doyle's curiosity because of inconsistencies in the prosecution case and a general sense that Slater was framed.
In his later years, Doyle became involved with Spiritualism, to the extent that he wrote a Professor Challenger novel on the subject, ''The Land of Mist''. One of the odder aspects of this period of his life was his book ''The Coming of the Fairies'' (1921). He was apparently totally convinced of the veracity of the Cottingley fairy photographs, which he reproduced in the book, together with theories about the nature and existence of fairies and spirits. His work on this topic was one of the reasons that one of his short story collections, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, was banned in the Soviet Union in 1929 for supposed occultism. This ban was later removed.
Doyle was friends for a time with the American magician Harry Houdini, a prominent opponent of the Spiritualist movement. Although Houdini insisted that Spiritualist mediums employed trickery (and consistently attempted to expose them as frauds), Doyle became convinced that Houdini himself possessed supernatural powers, a view expressed in Doyle's ''The Edge of the Unknown''. Houdini was apparently unable to convince Doyle that his feats were simply magic tricks, leading to a bitter, public falling out between the two.
Richard Milner, an American historian of science, has presented a case that Doyle may have been the perpetrator of the Piltdown man hoax of 1912, creating the counterfeit hominid fossil that fooled the scientific world for over 40 years. Milner says that Doyle had a motive, namely revenge on the scientific establishment for debunking one of his favourite psychics, and that ''The Lost World'' contains several encrypted clues regarding his involvement in the hoax.
Samuel Rosenberg's 1974 book ''Naked is the Best Disguise'' purports to explain how Doyle left, throughout his writings, open clues that related to hidden and suppressed aspects of his mentality.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle died of a heart attack in 1930 and is buried in the Church Yard at Minstead in the New Forest, Hampshire, England.
A statue has been erected in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's honour. It may be seen at Crowborough Cross in Crowborough, East Sussex, England, where Sir Arthur lived for 23 years. There is also a statue of Sherlock Holmes in Picardy Place, Edinburgh, Scotland close to the house where Conan Doyle was born.
Selected bibliography
Sherlock Holmes Stories
A Study in Scarlet (1887)
The Sign of Four (1890)
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892)
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (1894)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1902)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1904)
The Valley of Fear (1914)
His Last Bow (1917)
The Case Book of Sherlock Holmes (1927)
Professor Challenger Stories
The Lost World (1912)
The Poison Belt (1913)
The Land of Mists (1926)
The Disintegration Machine (1927)
When the World Screamed (1928)
Historical novels
The White Company (1891)
Micah Clarke (1888)
The Great Shadow (1892)
The Refugees (publ. 1893, written 1892)
Uncle Bernac (1897)
Sir Nigel (1906)
Other works
J. Habakuk Jephson's Statement (1883), a story about the fate of the ship Mary Celeste
Mystery of Cloomber (1889)
The Captain of the Polestar, and other tales (1890)
The Doings Of Raffles Haw (1891)
Beyond the City (1892)
Round The Red Lamp (1894)
The Parasite (1894)
The Stark Munro Letters (1895)
Rodney Stone (1896)
Songs of Action (1898)
The Tragedy of The Korosko (1898)
A Duet (1899)
The Great Boer War (1900)
The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard (1903)
Through the Magic Door (1907)
The Crime of the Congo (1909)
The New Revelation (1918)
The Vital Message (1919)
Tales of Terror Mystery (1923)
The History of Spiritualism (1926)
See also
Toronto Public Library
William Gillette Personal friend. Performed the most famous stage version of ''Sherlock Holmes''.
External links
includes lengthy biography, history of the estate, bibliography, and more.
The majority of his works in easy to read HTML format.
Site includes articles, quotes, games and little known facts
Doyle, Arthur Conan
Doyle, Arthur Conan
Doyle
Doyle, Arthur Conan
Doyle, Arthur Conan
af:Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
ar:
bg:
ca:Arthur Conan Doyle
cs:Arthur Conan Doyle
da:Arthur Conan Doyle
de:Arthur Conan Doyle
et:Arthur Conan Doyle
es:Arthur Conan Doyle
eo:Arthur Conan DOYLE
fa:
fr:Arthur Conan Doyle
hr:Arthur Conan Doyle
id:Arthur Conan Doyle
it:Arthur Conan Doyle
he:
nl:Arthur Conan Doyle
ja:
no:Arthur Conan Doyle
pl:Arthur Conan Doyle
pt:Arthur Conan Doyle
ro:Arthur Conan Doyle
ru: ,
sco:Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
simple:Arthur Conan Doyle
fi:Arthur Conan Doyle
sv:Arthur Conan Doyle
th:
uk:
zh:
An '''author''' is the person who creates a written work, such as a book, story, article or the like. This can be short or long, fiction or nonfiction, poetry or prose, technical or literature. Since capitalism, the '''author''' also needs to do it for payment (as a service).
Role in critical theory
One key issue in literary theory is the relationship between the meaning of a literary text and its author's conscious intent.
The phrase "Death of the Author" was popularized by Roland Barthes in his 1968 essay with the same name. It is used to convey the idea that texts have meaning and an independent existence outside that intended by the author, depending on the context and reader.
The death of the author is in self conscious opposition to the New Criticism, a literary critical movement popular in England and America in the first half of the 20th century. According to this movement, the author's intent is assumed to be quite clear to the author and it becomes the critic's task to understand this intent.
See also
novelist
writer
Lists of authors
Lists of poets
List of novelists
Category:Media occupations
Category:Literary criticism
cs:Autor
da:Forfatter
de:Autor
es:Autor
eo:A toro
fr: crivain
gl:Autor
he:
nl:Auteur
id:Penulis
ja:
no:Forfatter
pt:Autor
ru:
sv:F rfattare
zh:
:''This is an article about Russian mathematician Andrey Markov. For ice hockey player Andrei Markov, see Andrei Markov (hockey player).''
'''Andrey Andreyevich Markov''' ( ) (June 14, 1856 N.S. July 20, 1922) was a Russian mathematician.
Markov was born in Ryazan. He studied at St. Petersburg University in 1874 under the tutelage of Chebyshev. In 1886, he became a member of the St. Petersburg Academy of Science. He is best known for his work on theory of stochastic processes. His research later became known as Markov chains.
See also
Markov chain
Gauss Markov theorem
Hidden Markov model
Markov number
Markov property
Markov's inequality
References
. . . " , ". " ", 2 , 15, . 135 156, 1906.
A.A. Markov. "Extension of the limit theorems of probability theory to a sum of variables connected in a chain". reprinted in Appendix B of: R. Howard. ''Dynamic Probabilistic Systems, volume 1: Markov Chains''. John Wiley and Sons, 1971.
External links
''(biography of Markov's son, located at the Steklov Institute of Mathematics at St.Petersburg)''
br
Markov, Andrei Andreevich
Markov, Andrei Andreevich
Markov, Andrey
de:Andrei Andrejewitsch Markow
es:Andrei Markov
fr:Andrei Markov (math maticien)
it:Andrej Andreevic Markov (padre)
pl:Andriej Markow (starszy)
pt:Andrei Andreyevich Markov
ru: , ( )
uk:
zh:
! So far we have a dictionary definition and a discussion of the correct use of the term
An '''alumnus''' (masculine) or '''alumna''' (feminine) of a college, university, or school is a former student. Informal equivalents are '''alum''' and '''alumn''' (with a silent "n"). The term is often mistakenly thought of as synonymous with "graduate." Alumni ae reunions are popular events at many institutions. They are usually organized by alumni associations and are often social occasions for fundraising.
In Latin, ''alumnus'' is the masculine singular form and ''alumna'' the feminine singular form. (The words are derived from the Latin verb ''alere'', "to nourish," and literally mean "nourished one" or "nursling.") Although these terms are recommended by leading English language dictionaries, their use can be limited because they are gender specific. The Latin plural is '''alumni''' for men and mixed groups and '''alumnae''' for women. The gender neutral English term ''alum'' ''alumn'', created by clipping the ending from ''alumnus'', is also used, along with its plural '''alums''' '''alumns'''.
Recently, the definition of "alum" has expanded to include people who have "matriculated at" or exited from any kind of organization or process. As such, one can potentially be a "corporate alum" of XYZ Company, or an alum of a military branch, non profit organization, or training process.
Educational institutions tend to follow Latin usage: ''alumnus'' for males, ''alumna'' for females, and ''alumni'' for mixed groups. All women colleges use ''alumna'' and ''alumnae''. Some institutions, such as Texas A M University, do not refer to their graduates as "alumni" or even "graduates," choosing to use the term ''former students''.
In the United Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, Australia, the phrases '''old boy''' and '''old girl''' are traditionally used for former school pupils, and '''old member''' for former university students. Some private schools in Canada, such as Upper Canada College and the Bishop Strachan School also use '''old boy''' and '''old girl'''. The term '''old student''' can nowadays refer to the graduates of either schools or universities. In Scotland, the term ''Former Pupil'' (FP) is also used, especially when referring to sports teams of a school.
See also
Alma mater
Old boy network
Alumni association
Category:Academia
de:Alumnus
nl:Alumnus
nb:Alumni
sv:Alumn
'''''Angst''''' is a German, Dutch and North Germanic word for fear or anxiety. It is used in English to describe an intense feeling of internal emotional strife.
A different but related meaning is attributed to Danish philosopher S ren Kierkegaard (18131855). Kierkegaard used the word ''angst'' (Danish, meaning "dread") to describe a profound and deep seated spiritual condition of insecurity and despair in the free human being. Where the animal is a slave to its God given instincts but always confident in its own actions, Kierkegaard believed that the freedom given to mankind leaves the human in a constant fear of failing its responsibilities to God. Kierkegaard's concept of angst is considered to be an important stepping stone for 20th century existentialism.
While Kierkegaard's feeling of angst is fear of actual responsibility to God, in modern use, angst is broadened to include general frustration associated with the conflict between actual responsibilities to self, one's principles, and others (possibly including God). Still, the angst in alternative music may be more accessible to most audiences than the esoteric tradition of existentialism. The term "angst" is now widely used with a negative and derisive connotation that mocks the expression of a common adolescent experience of malaise.
Angst in contemporary music
Angst, in contemporary connotative use, most often describes the intense frustration and other related emotions of teenagers and the mood of the music with which they identify. Punk rock, grunge, emo, and virtually any Alternative Rock dramatically combining elements of discord, melancholy and excitement may be said to assert angst. There is an obvious connection to this music and the various subjugation of its proponent youth or racial or sociopolitical minority subculture.
Angst was probably first discussed in relation to contemporary music in the mid to late 1980s and 1990s. In the 1980s "teen angst" was expressed in music to a certain extent in the rise of "punk", but the word "angst" is currently more associated with, and was probably first used in reference to, the grunge movement and the band Nirvana. Nirvana themselves seem to have been aware of this, as evidenced by the first line of Serve the Servants in which Kurt Cobain describes the success of writing songs dealing with the subject (''Teenage angst has paid off well Now I'm bored and old...'').
See also
English words of German origin
Anxiety
Suffering
Anomie
Alienation
Ennui
Category:Emotion
Category:Existentialism
Category:German loanwords
fr:Angoisse
io:Angoro
it:Angoisse
nl:Faalangst
pl:Angoisse
sv: ngest
'''Anxiety''' refers to a complex combination of negative emotions that includes fear, apprehension and worry, and is often accompanied by physical sensations such as palpitations, chest pain and or shortness of breath.
Anxiety is often described as having cognitive, somatic, emotional and behavioral components (Seligman, Walker blood pressure and heart rate are increased, sweating is increased, bloodflow to the major muscle groups is increased, and immune and digestive system functions are inhibited. Externally, somatic signs of anxiety may include pale skin, sweating, trembling and pupillary dilation. Emotionally, anxiety causes a sense of dread or panic, nausea and chills. Behaviorally, both voluntary and involuntary behaviors may arise directed at escaping or avoiding the source of anxiety. These behaviors are frequent and often maladaptive, being most extreme in anxiety disorders. However, anxiety is not always pathological or maladaptive: it is a common emotion along with fear, anger, sadness and happiness, and it has a very important function in relation to survival.
Neural circuitry involving the amygdala and hippocampus is thought to underlie anxiety (Rosen Zald, Hagen Pardo, 2002). In these studies, the participants also reported moderate anxiety. This might indicate that anxiety is a protective mechanism designed to prevent the organism from engaging in potentially harmful behaviors such as feeding on rotten food.
A chronically recurring case of anxiety that has a serious effect on a person's life may be clinically diagnosed as an anxiety disorder. The most common are generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, phobias, obsessive compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Diagnosis
A good assessment is essential for the initial diagnosis of an anxiety disorder, preferably using a standardised interview or questionnaire procedure alongside expert evaluation and the views of the person themselves. There should be a medical examination in order to identify possible medical conditions that can cause the symptoms of anxiety. A family history of anxiety disorders is suggestive of the possibility of an anxiety disorder.
Diagnosis using a blood test
In 2005 a research team from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem developed a method for potentially detecting raised anxiety by performing a simple blood test. This is only an early unreplicated study of a possible screening tool.
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder is a common chronic disorder that affects twice as many women as men and can lead to considerable impairment (Brawman Mintzer Lydiard, 1996, 1997). As the name implies, generalized anxiety disorder is characterized by long lasting anxiety that is not focused on any particular object or situation. In other words it is unspecific or free floating. People with this disorder feel afraid of something but are unable to articulate the specific fear. They fret constantly and have a hard time controlling their worries. Because of persistent muscle tension and autonomic fear reactions, they may develop headaches, heart palpitations, dizziness, and insomnia. These physical complaints, combined with the intense, long term anxiety, make it difficult to cope with normal daily activities.
Panic disorder
In panic disorder, a person suffers brief attacks of intense terror and apprehension that cause trembling and shaking, dizziness, and difficulty breathing. One who is often plagued by sudden bouts of intense anxiety might be said to be afflicted by this disorder. The American Psychiatric Association (2000) defines a panic attack as fear or discomfort that arises abruptly and peaks in 10 minutes or less.
Although panic attacks sometimes seem to occur out of nowhere, they generally happen after frightening experiences, prolonged stress, or even exercise. Many people who have panic attacks (especially their first one) think they are having a heart attack and often end up at the doctor or ER. Even if the tests all come back normal the person will still worry, with the physical manifestations of anxiety only reinforcing their fear that something is wrong with their body. Extreme awareness of every little thing that happens or changes with their body can make for a stressful time.
Normal changes in heartbeat, such as when climbing a flight of stairs will be noticed by a panic sufferer and lead them to think something is wrong with their heart or they are about to have another panic attack. Some begin to worry excessively and even quit jobs or refuse to leave home to avoid future attacks. Panic disorder can be diagnosed when several apparently spontaneous attacks lead to a persistent concern about future attacks. A common complication of panic disorder is agoraphobia anxiety about being in a place or situation where escape is difficult or embarrassing (Craske, 2000 Gorman, 2000).
Phobia
This category involves a strong, irrational fear and avoidance of an object or situation. The person knows the fear is irrational, yet the anxiety remains. Phobic disorders differ from generalized anxiety disorders and panic disorders because there is a specific stimulus or situation that elicits a strong fear response. Imagine how it would feel to be so frightened by a spider that you would try to jump out of a speeding car to get away from it. This is how a person suffering from phobia might feel.
People with phobias have especially powerful imaginations, so they vividly anticipate terrifying consequences from encountering such feared objects as knives, bridges, blood, enclosed places, or certain animals. These individuals recognize that their fears are excessive and unreasonable but are generally unable to control their anxiety.
In addition to specific phobias, such as fears of knives, rats or spiders, there is another category of phobias known as social phobias. Individuals with this disorder experience intense fear of being negatively evaluated by others or of being publicly embarrassed because of impulsive acts. Almost everyone experiences "stage fright" when speaking or performing in front of a group. But people with social phobias become so anxious that performance is out of the question. In fact, their fear of public scrutiny and potential humiliaton becomes so pervasive that normal life is impossible (den Boer 2000 Margolis Swartz, 2001). Another social phobia is love shyness, which most adversely affects certain men. Those afflicted find themselves unable to initiate intimate adult relationships (Gilmartin 1987).
Obsessive compulsive disorder
Obsessive compulsive disorder is a type of anxiety disorder characterized by obsessions and or compulsions. Obsessions are distressing, repetitive thoughts or images that the individual often realizes are senseless. Compulsions are repetitive behaviors that the person feels forced or compelled into doing, in order to relieve anxiety. One example would be the obsession of extreme cleanliness and fear of contamination, which may lead to the compulsion of having to wash one's hands hundreds of times a day. Another example may be the obsession that one's door is unlocked, which may lead to the constant checking and rechecking of doors.
Treatment overview
Mainstream treatment for anxiety consists of the prescription of anxiolytic agents and or referral to a cognitive behavioral therapist. There are indications that a combination of the two can be more effective than either one alone.
Prescription medication
The acute symptoms of anxiety are most often controlled with anxiolytic agents such as benzodiazepines. Diazepam (valium) was one of the first such drugs. Today we see a wide range of anti anxiety agents that are based on benzodiazepines, although only two have been approved for panic attacks, Klonopin and Xanax. All benzodiazepines are physically addictive, and extended use should be carefully monitored by a physician, preferably a psychiatrist. It is very important that once placed on a regimen of regular benzodiazepine use, the user should not abruptly discontinue the medication.
Some of the SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) have been used with varying degrees of success to treat patients with chronic anxiety, the best results seen with those who exhibit symptoms of clinical depression and non specific anxiety or general anxiety disorder concurrently. Beta blockers are also sometimes used to treat the somatic symptoms associated with anxiety, especially the shakiness of "stage fright."
Many scientists believe that the benzodiazepines and other antianxiety drugs are greatly overprescribed and potentially addictive. See, for example, Fred Leavitt's ''The REAL Drug Abusers'' (Rowman Littlefield, 2003). The addicitive nature of the benzodiazepine class became apparent in the mid 1960's when Valium (Diazepam), the first drug in the class to win FDA approval, resulted in thousands of people who quickly showed the classic symptoms of addiction when used for more than a week or two consistently.
The most addictive of the benzodiazepines appears to be Xanax due to its rapid onset and short half life in the blood stream. Xanax also has the dubious distinction of being the only benzodiazepine that often requires hospitalization for discontinuation as a precaution against dangerous and sometimes fatal seizures as part of the detoxification process. No other medications in this class have shown this fatal side effect, although abrupt discontinuation of virtually any benzodiazepine can result in cravings, stomach pains, cramps, increased anxiety, insomnia and other signs of withdrawal.
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is the most popular and effective form of psychotherapy used to treat anxiety. The goal of the cognitive behavioral therapist is to decrease avoidance behaviors and help the patient develop coping skills. This
may entail:
Challenging false or self defeating beliefs.
Developing a positive self talk skill.
Developing negative thought replacement.
Systematic desensitization, also called ''exposure'' (used for agoraphobia and OCD mainly).
Providing knowledge that will help the patient cope. (For example, someone who suffers from panic may be informed that fast, prolonged, heart palpitations are in themselves harmless).
Unlike prescription medication, the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy depends on various subjective factors, such as therapist competence. In addition to conventional therapy, there are at home cognitive behavioral programs sufferers can use as part of their treatment.
Other coping strategies
A variety of over the counter supplements and medications are also used for their alleged anti anxiety properties, however there is little scientific evidence to back up these claims. Kava Kava is a popular herbal treatment small doses either taken regularly through the day or when early symptoms are noticed by the patient. Valerian root is also reputed to have anti anxiety and sedative properties, as are passion fruit, passion flower, St. John's wort, hops, and chamomile.
Popular nutritional supplements for dealing with anxiety include magnesium and B complex vitamins.
Self help and relaxation techniques also play an important role in relieving anxiety symptoms. Self help includes:
Proper diet This includes reduction in consumption of caffeine, sugar, and generally an improvement of eating habits. Caffeine reduction should be gradual. Some anxiety sufferers report considerable reductions in their anxiety just from taking these measures.
Exercise Some exercise is thought to relieve stress. Anxiety sufferers should note that rapid heart palpitations during exercise can trigger a panic attack, so it is probably better to gradually develop an exercise routine while on a cognitive behavioral program.
Laughing
Breathing techniques and proper breathing A diaphragmic breathing technique is often recommended (as opposed to chest breathing).
Proper sleep.
Relaxation techniques A state of relaxation can be achieved with the help of relaxation tapes, Yoga or relaxation therapy.
Stress management. This may entail changes in lifestyle and time management. There are a number of books specialized in stress management.
Panic attack coping strategies Specific strategies for dealing with panic episodes have been proposed, such as slow abdominal breathing and use of reassuring self talk.
Search for meaning and purpose Some experts have indicated that residual generalized anxiety can be the result of a sort of "boredom" about existence. They recommend looking for an occupation the sufferer finds meaningful.
Alcoholic drinks are probably the most widely used substance for the alleviation of anxiety. Anxiety sufferers are cautioned that alcohol is also a powerful depressant and has a plethora of dangerous and uncomfortable side effects in addition to being highly addictive.
Anxiety in palliative care
Some research has strongly suggested that treating anxiety in cancer patients improves their quality of life. The treatment generally consists of counselling, relaxation techniques or pharmacologically with benzodiazepines.
Anxiety and alternative medicine
A 2002 CDC found that complementary and alternative methods were used to treat anxiety depression by 4.5 percent of U.S. adults who used CAM.
Existential anxiety
Theologians like Paul Tillich and psychologists like Sigmund Freud have characterized anxiety as the reaction to what Tillich called, "The trauma of nonbeing." That is, the human comes to realize that there is a point at which they might cease to be (die), and their encounter with reality becomes characterized by anxiety. Religion, according to both Tillich and Freud, then becomes a carefully crafted coping mechanism in response to this anxiety.
Test anxiety
Test anxiety is the uneasiness, apprehension, or nervousness felt by students who have a fear of failing an exam. Students suffering from test anxiety may experience any of the following: the association of grades with personal worth, embarrassment by a teacher, taking a class that is beyond their ability, fear of alienation from parents or friends, time pressures, or feeling a loss of control. Emotional, cognitive, behavioral, and physical components can all be present in test anxiety. Sweating, dizziness, headaches, racing heartbeats, nausea, fidgeting, and drumming on a desk are all common. An optimal level of arousal is necessary to best complete a task such as an exam however, when the anxiety or level of arousal exceeds that optimum, it results in a decline in performance.
See also
Angst
Social anxiety
References
Bourne, E. J. ''Anxiety and phobia workbook''
Rosen, J.B. 325 350.
Seligman, M.E.P., Walker, E.F. Rosenhan, D.L. (2001). ''Abnormal psychology'', (4th ed.) New York: W.W. Norton Company, Inc.
Zald, D.H., Hagen, M.C. Pardo, J.V. (2002). "Neural correlates of tasting concentrated quinine and sugar solutions". ''J. Neurophysiol.'' '''87'''(2), 1068 75.
Zald, D.H. Pardo, J.V. (1997). "Emotion, olfaction, and the human amygdala: amygdala activation during aversive olfactory stimulation." ''Proc Nat'l Acad Sci'' USA. '''94'''(8), 4119 24.
External links
Comprehensive information on anxiety and panic, from causes of anxiety disorders to anxiety medications and alternative remedies. Anxiety tests, boards, journals, support groups.
An article
Anxiety Information and Support
Category:Symptoms
Category:Motivation
cs: zkost
de:Angst
es:Ansiedad
fr:Anxi t
io:Anxio
is:Kv i
nl:Faalangst
no:Angst
pt:Ansiedade
pl:L?k
sv: ngest
REDIRECT A. A. Milne
'''Alan Alexander Milne''' (January 18, 1882 January 31, 1956), also known as '''A. A. Milne''', was a British author, best known for his books about the animated teddy bear, Winnie the Pooh, and for various children's poems. Milne had made several reputations, most notably as a playwright, before the huge success of Pooh overshadowed all his previous work.
Biography
Milne was born in Scotland but raised in London at a small private school in Kilburn run by his father John Vine Milne. One of his teachers was H. G. Wells. He attended Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge where he studied on a mathematics scholarship. While there, he edited and wrote for ''Granta'', a student magazine. He collaborated with his brother Kenneth and their articles appeared over the initials AKM. Milne's work came to the attention of the leading British humour magazine Punch, where Milne was to become a contributor and later assistant editor of ''Punch''.
His son Christopher Robin was born in 1920. Milne joined the British Army in World War I but after the war wrote a denunciation of war titled ''Peace with Honour'' (1934) (which he retracted somewhat in 1940 with ''War with Honour'').
During the war, Milne was one of the most prominent critics of English comic writer P.G. Wodehouse, who was captured at his country home in France by the Nazis and imprisoned for a year. Wodehouse made radio broadcasts about his internment, which were broadcast from Berlin. Although the lighthearted broadcasts made fun of the Germans, Milne accused Wodehouse of committing an act of near treason by cooperating with his country's enemy. Wodehouse got some revenge by creating fatuous parodies of the Christopher Robin poems in some of his later stories.
In 1925, Milne bought a country home, Cotchford Farm, in Hartfield, East Sussex. He retired to the farm after brain surgery in 1952 left him an invalid.
Literary career
Milne is most famous for his Pooh books about a boy named Christopher Robin, after his son, and various characters inspired by his son's stuffed animals, most notably the bear named Winnie the Pooh. (Reputedly, a Canadian black bear named Winnie (after Winnipeg), used as a military mascot by the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, a Canadian Infantry Regiment in World War I and left to London Zoo after the war, is the source of the name.) E. H. Shepard illustrated the original Pooh books, using his own teddy, Growler ("a magnificent bear") as the model Christopher Robin's own toys are now under glass in New York.
The overwhelming success of his children's books was to become a source of considerable annoyance to Milne, whose self avowed aim was to write whatever he pleased, and who until then had found a ready audience for each change of direction: he had freed pre war Punch from its ponderous facetiousness he had made a considerable reputation as a playwright (like his idol JM Barrie) on both sides of the Atlantic he had produced a durable, character led and witty piece of detective writing in ''The Red House Mystery'' indeed, his publisher was displeased when he announced his intention to write poems for children and he had never lacked an audience.
But once Milne had, in his own words, "said Goodbye to all that in 70,000 words", the approximate length of the four children's books, he had no intention of producing a copy of a copy, given that one of the sources of inspiration, his son, was growing older.
His reception remained warmer in America than Britain, and he continued to publish novels and short stories, but by the late 1930s the audience for Milne's grown up writing had largely vanished: he observed bitterly in his autobiography that a critic had said that the hero of his latest play ("God help it") was simply "Christopher Robin grown up ... what an obsession with me children are become!"
Even his old home, ''Punch'', where the ''When We Were Very Young'' verses had first appeared, was ultimately to reject him, as Christopher Milne details in his autobiography ''The Enchanted Places'', though Methuen continued to publish whatever Milne wrote, including the long poem 'The Norman Church' and an assembly of articles entitled ''Year In, Year Out'' (which Milne likened to a benefit night for the author).
After Milne's death, the rights to the Pooh characters were sold by his widow, Daphne to the Walt Disney Company, which has made a number of Pooh cartoon movies, as well as a large amount of Pooh related merchandise. She also destroyed his papers.
Milne also wrote a number of poems, including ''Vespers'', ''They're Changing Guard at Buckingham Palace'', and ''King John's Christmas'', which were published in the books ''When We Were Very Young'' and ''Now We Are Six''.
His poems have been parodied many times, including the books When We Were Rather Older and ''Now We Are Sixty''.
He also adapted Kenneth Grahame's novel ''The Wind in the Willows'' for the stage as ''Toad of Toad Hall''. The title was an implicit admission that such chapters as ''The Piper at the Gates of Dawn'' could not survive translation to the theater.
Biographies
Milne's friend Frank Swinnerton's book ''The Georgian Literary Scene'' contains a substantial section about him his son has written several books of autobiography: ''The Enchanted Places'', in particular, is an account of his attempt to escape from the shadow of a famous father and a burdensome name ''The Path Through the Trees'' continues the story into adult life. Ann Thwaites' ''AA Milne: His Life'' is an excellent and detailed biography, although it gives little space to the plays a spin off book tells the story for a younger readership, concentrating on Pooh.
Works
Novels
''Lovers in London'', (1905) (Some consider this more of a short story collection Milne didn't like it and considered ''The Day's Play'' as his first book)
''Once on a Time'', (1917) a fairytale with an adult slant
''Mr. Pim Passes By'', (1921)
''The Red House Mystery'', (1921)
''Two People'', (1931) (Inside jacket claims this is Milne's first attempt at a novel.)
''Four Days Wonder'', (1933)
''Chloe Marr'', (1946)
Non Fiction
''Peace with Honour'', (1934)
''It's Too Late Now'', (1939) (autobiography)
''War with Honour'', (1940)
''Year In, Year Out'', (1952)
Punch articles:
''The Day's Play'', (1910)
''Once a Week'', (1914)
''The Holiday Round'', (1912)
''The Sunny Side'', (1921)
''Those Were the Days'', (1929 selection of Punch pieces from the above four books
Selections of newspaper articles and introductions to books by others:
''Not That It Matters'', (1920)
''By Way of Introduction'', (1929)
Story Collections for Children
''Gallery of Children'', (1925)
''Winnie the Pooh'', (1926)
''The House at Pooh Corner'', (1928)
Short Stories
A Table by the Band
Poetry
For the Luncheon Interval poems from Punch
''When We Were Very Young'', (1924)
''Now We Are Six'', (1927)
''Behind the Lines'', (1940)
''The Norman Church'', (1948)
Plays
Milne wrote over 25 plays including:
''Wurzel Flummery'', (1917)
''Belinda'', (1918)
''The Boy Comes Home'', (1918)
''Make Believe'', (1918) a play for children
''The Camberley Triangle'', (1919)
''Mr. Pim Passes By'', (1919)
''The Red Feathers'', (1920)
''The Romantic Age'', (1920)
''The Stepmother'', (1920)
''The Truth about Blayds'', (1920)
''The Dover Road'', (1921)
''The Lucky One'', (1922)
''The Artist: a Duologue'', (1923)
''Give Me Yesterday'', (1923) aka Success in the UK
''The Great Broxopp'', (1923)
''Ariadne'', (1924)
''The Man in the Bowler Hat'', (1924) one act
''To Have the Honour'', (1924)
''Portrait of a Gentleman in Slippers'', (1926)
''Success a play in three acts'', (1926)
''Miss Marlow at Play'', (1927)
''The Fourth Wall or The Perfect Alibi'', (1928)
''The Ivory Door'', (1929)
''Toad of Toad Hall'', (1929) (Adaptation of The Wind in the Willows)
''Other People's Lives'', (1933) aka They Don't Mean Any Harm
''Miss Elizabeth Bennett'' (based on Pride and Prejudice?, (1936)
''Sarah Simple'', (1937)
''Gentleman Unknown'', (1938)
''The Ugly Duckling'' (1946)
''Before the Flood'', (1951)
''Michael and Mary''
Books on Pooh and Milne
Crews, Frederick, ''The Pooh Perplex'', Chicago London, University of Chicago Press, 2003 (1st ed. 1963) ISBN 0226120589
Crews, Frederick, ''Postmodern Pooh'', New York, North Point Press, 2001 ISBN 0865476543
Hoff, Benjamin, ''The Tao of Pooh'', New York, Penguin, 1983 ISBN 0140067477
Hoff, Benjamin, ''The Te of Piglet'', New York, Dutton Adult, 1992 ISBN 0525934960
Milne, Christopher Robin and A. R. Melrose (ed.), ''Beyond the World of Pooh: Selections from the Memoirs of Christopher Milne'', New York, Dutton, 1998 ISBN 0525458883
Thwaite, Ann, ''A. A. Milne: His Life'', New York, Random House, 1990 ISBN 0394587243
Tyerman Williams, John, ''Pooh and the Philosophers: In Which It Is Shown That All of Western Philosophy Is Merely a Preamble to Winnie The Pooh'', London, Methuen, 1995 ISBN 0525455205
Wullschlager, Jackie, ''Inventing Wonderland: The Lives and Fantasies of Lewis Carroll, Edward Lear, J. M. Barrie, Kenneth Grahame and A. A. Milne'', New York Detroit, The Free Press, 1996 ISBN 0684822865
Films
''The Fourth Wall'' was made into a film called ''The Perfect Alibi''
''Michael and Mary'' was filmed in 1932
External links
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
Milne, A. A.
bg:
cs:Alexander A. Milne
de:A. A. Milne
es:Alan Alexander Milne
eo:A. A. MILNE
it:Alan Alexander Milne
he:
nl:A.A. Milne
ja:A A
no:A. A. Milne
pl:Alan Alexander Milne
ru: ,
fi:A. A. Milne
sv:A.A. Milne
'''Addiction''' is a compulsion to repeat a behaviour regardless of its consequences. A person who is addicted is sometimes called an '''addict'''.
There is a lack of consensus as to what may properly be termed 'addiction.' Some within the medical community maintain a rigid definition of addiction and contend that the term is only applicable to a process of escalating drug or alcohol use as a result of repeated exposure. However, addiction is often applied to compulsive behaviors other than drug use, such as overeating or gambling. In all cases, the term addiction describes a chronic pattern of behaviour that continues despite the direct or indirect adverse consequences that result from engaging in the behavior. It is quite common for an addict to express the desire to stop the behaviour, but find himself or herself unable to cease.
Addiction is often characterized by a craving for more of the drug or behavior, increased physiological tolerance to exposure, and withdrawal symptoms in the absence of the stimulus. Many drugs and behaviours that provide either pleasure or relief from pain pose a risk of addiction or dependency.
Terminology and usage
The medical community now makes a careful theoretical distinction between ''physical dependence'' (characterized by symptoms of withdrawal) and ''psychological addiction'' (or simply ''addiction''). Addiction is now narrowly defined as "uncontrolled, compulsive use despite harm" if there is no harm being suffered by, or damage done to, the patient or another party, then clinically it may be considered compulsive, but within this narrow definition it is not categorized as "addiction". In practice, however, the two kinds of addiction are not always easy to distinguish. Addictions often have both physical and psychological components.
There is also a lesser known situation called pseudo addiction, where a patient will exhibit drug seeking behaviour reminiscent of psychological addiction, however in this case, the patients tend to have genuine pain or other symptoms that have been undertreated. Unlike true psychological addiction, however, these behaviours tend to stop as soon as their pain is adequately treated.
The term "''dry drunk''" is sometimes attached to patterns of behavior that persist after an object of dependence and or misuse
has been removed from daily living routines. This type of behaviour is fairly common in early recovery for those recovering from substance misuse.
The obsolete term ''physical addiction'' is deprecated, because of its connotations. In modern pain management with opioids: physical dependence is nearly universal but addiction is rare. Some of the highly addictive drugs (''hard drugs''), such as cocaine, induce relatively little physical dependence.
Not all doctors do agree on what addiction or dependency is , particularly because traditionally, addiction has been defined as being possible only to a psychoactive substance (for example alcohol, tobacco, or drugs), which is ingested, crosses the blood brain barrier, and alters the natural chemical behaviour of the brain temporarily. Many people, both psychology professionals and laypersons, now feel that there should be accommodation made to include psychological dependency on such things as gambling, food, sex, pornography, computers, work, and shopping spending. However, these are things or tasks which, when used or performed, cannot cross the blood brain barrier and hence, do not fit into the traditional view of addiction. Symptoms mimicking withdrawal may occur with abatement of such behaviours however, it is said by those who adhere to a traditionalist view that these withdrawal like symptoms are not strictly reflective of an addiction, but rather of a behavioural disorder. In spite of traditionalist protests and warnings that overextension of definitions may cause the wrong treatment to be used (thus failing the person with the behavioural problem), popular media, and some members of the field, do represent the aforementioned behavioural examples as addictions.
note: the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM IVR) specifically spells out criteria to define abuse and dependence conditions.
Varied forms of addiction
Physical dependency
''Physical dependency'' on a substance is defined by the appearance of characteristic withdrawal symptoms when the drug is suddenly discontinued. While opioids, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, alcohol and nicotine are all well known for their ability to induce physical dependence, other drugs share this property that are not considered addictive: cortisone, beta blockers and most antidepressants are examples. So while physical dependency can be a major factor in the psychology of addiction, the primary attribute of an addictive drug is its ability to induce euphoria while causing harm.
Some drugs induce physical dependence or physiological tolerance but not addiction for example many laxatives, which are not psychoactive nasal decongestants, which can cause rebound congestion if used for more than a few days in a row and some antidepressants, most notably Effexor and Paxil, as they have quite short half lives, so stopping them abruptly causes a more rapid change in the neurotransmitter balance in the brain than many other antidepressants. Many non addictive prescription drugs should not be suddenly stopped, so a doctor should be consulted before abruptly discontinuing them.
The speed with which a given individual becomes addicted to various substances varies with the substance, the frequency of use, the means of ingestion, and the individual. Some alcoholics report they exhibited alcoholic tendencies from the moment of first intoxication, while most people can drink socially without ever becoming addicted. Because of this variation, some people hypothesise that physical dependency and addiction are in large part genetically moderated. Nicotine is one of the most addictive psychoactive substances: although 35 million smokers make an attempt to quit every year, less than 7 achieve even one year of abstinence.
While eating disorders, like other behavioral addictions, are usually considered primarily psychological disorders, they are sometimes treated as addictions, especially if they include elements of addictive behavior. Sufferers may experience withdrawal or withdrawal like symptoms if they alter their diet suddenly. This suggests that some common food substances, especially chocolate, sugar, salt and white flour may have the potential for addiction. In addition, frequent overeating can also be considered an addiction.
From the NIDA research report on nicotine addiction.
Psychological addiction
''Psychological addictions'' are a dependency of the mind, and lead to psychological withdrawal symptoms. Addictions can theoretically form for any rewarding behavior, or as a habitual means to avoid undesired activity, but typically they only do so to a clinical level in individuals who have emotional, social, or psychological dysfunctions, taking the place of normal positive stimuli not otherwise attained (see Rat Park).
Addiction and drug control legislation
Most countries have legislation which brings various drugs and drug like substances under the control of licensing systems. Typically this legislation covers any or all of the opiates, cannabinoids, cocaine, barbiturates, hallucinogens and a variety of more modern synthetic drugs, and unlicensed production, supply or possession is a criminal offence.
Usually, however, drug classification under such legislation is not related simply to addictiveness. The substances covered often have very different addictive properties. Some are highly prone to cause physical dependency, whilst others rarely cause any form of compulsive need whatsoever.
Also, although the legislation may be justifiable on moral or public health grounds, it can make addiction or dependency a much more serious issue for the individual: reliable supplies of a drug become difficult to secure, and the individual becomes vulnerable to both criminal abuse and legal punishment.
Methods of care
Early editions of the American Psychiatric Association's ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders'' (DSM) described addiction as a physical dependency to a substance that resulted in withdrawal symptoms in its absence. Recent editions, including DSM IV, have moved toward a diagnostic instrument that classifies such conditions as dependency, rather than addiction. The American Society of Addiction Medicine recommends treatment for people with chemical dependency based on patient placement criteria (currently listed in PPC 2), which attempt to match levels of care according to clinical assessments in six areas, including:
Acute intoxication and or withdrawal potential
Biomedical conditions or complications
Emotional behavioral conditions or complications
Treatment acceptance resistance
Relapse potential
Recovery environment
Some medical systems, including those of at least 15 states of the United States, refer to an Addiction Severity Index to assess the severity of problems related to substance use. The index assesses problems in six areas: medical, employment support, alcohol and other drug use, legal, family social, and psychiatric.
While addiction or dependency is related to seemingly uncontrollable urges, and may have roots in genetic predisposition, treatment of dependency is always classified as behavioral medicine. Early treatment of acute withdrawal often includes medical detoxification, which can include doses of anxiolytics to reduce symptoms of withdrawal. In chronic opiate addiction, a surrogate drug such as methadone is sometimes offered as a form of opiate replacement therapy. But treatment approaches universally focus on the individual's ultimate choice to pursue an alternate course of action.
Therapists often classify patients with chemical dependencies as either interested or not interested in changing. Treatments usually involve planning for specific ways to avoid the addictive stimulus, and therapeutic interventions intended to help a client learn healthier ways to find satisfaction. Clinical leaders in recent years have attempted to tailor intervention approaches to specific influences that effect addictive behavior, using therapeutic interviews in an effort to discover factors that led a person to embrace unhealthy, addictive sources of pleasure or relief from pain.
class "prettytable" Cellpadding 4 width 60 align center bgcolor "FOF8FF"
style "background color: AFEEEE font size:large"
!colspan 3 '''Treatment Modality Matrix'''
style "background color: BFEFFF"
!'''''Behavioral Pattern'''''
!'''''Intervention'''''
!'''''Goals'''''
Low self esteem, anxiety, verbal hostility
Relationship therapy, client centered approach
Increase self esteem, reduce hostility and anxiety
Defective personal constructs, ignorance of interpersonal means
Cognitive restructuring including directive and group therapies
Insight
Focal anxiety such as fear of crowds
Desensitization
Change response to same cue
Undesirable behaviors, lacking appropriate behaviors
Aversive conditioning, operant conditioning, counter conditioning
Eliminate or replace behavior
Lack of information
Provide information
Have client act on information
Difficult social circumstances
Organizational intervention, environmental manipulation, family counseling
Remove cause of social difficulty
Poor social performance, rigid interpersonal behavior
Sensitivity training, communication training, group therapy
Increase interpersonal repertoire, desensitization to group functioning
Grossly bizarre behavior
Medical referral
Protect from society, prepare for further treatment
style "text align:center font size:small"
colspan 3 Adapted from: ''Essentials of Clinical Dependency Counseling'', Aspen Publishers
Diverse explanations
Several explanations (or "models") have been presented to explain addiction:
The ''moral model'' states that addictions are the result of human weakness, and are defects of character. Those who advance this model do not accept that there is any biological basis for addiction. They often have scant sympathy for people with serious addictions, believing either that a person with greater moral strength could have the force of will to break an addiction, or that the addict demonstrated a great moral failure in the first place by starting the addiction. The moral model is widely applied to dependency on illegal substances, perhaps purely for social or political reasons, but is no longer widely considered to have any therapeutic value. Elements of the moral model, especially a focus on individual choices, have found enduring roles in other approaches to the treatment of dependencies.
The ''opponent process model'' generated by Richard Soloman states that for every psychological event A will be followed by its opposite psychological event B. For example, the pleasure one experiences from heroin is followed by an opponent process of withdrawal, or the terror of jumping out of an airplane is rewarded with intense pleasure when the parachute opens. This model is related to the opponent process color theory. If you look at the color red then quickly look at a gray area you will see green. There are many examples of opponent processes in the nervous system including taste, motor movement, touch, vision, and hearing. Opponent processes occurring at the sensory level may translate "down stream" into addictive or habit forming behavior.
The ''disease model'' holds that addiction is an illness, and comes about as a result of the impairment of healthy neurochemical or behavioral processes. While there is some dispute among clinicians as to the reliability of this model, it is widely employed in therapeutic settings. Most treatment approaches involve recognition that dependencies are behavioral dysfunctions, and thus involve some element of physical or mental disease.
The ''genetic model'' posits a genetic predisposition to certain behaviors. It is frequently noted that certain addictions "run in the family," and while researchers continue to explore the extent of genetic influence, there is strong evidence that genetic predisposition is often a factor in dependency. Researchers have had difficulty assessing differences, however, between social causes of dependency learned in family settings and genetic factors related to heredity.
The ''cultural model'' recognizes that the influence of culture is a strong determinant of whether or not individuals fall prey to certain addictions. For example, alcoholism is rare among Saudi Arabians, where obtaining alcohol is difficult and using alcohol is prohibited. In North America, on the other hand, the incidence of gambling addictions soared in the last two decades of the 20th century, mirroring the growth of the gaming industry. Half of all patients diagnosed as alcoholic are born into families where alcohol is used heavily, suggesting that familiar influence, genetic factors, or more likely both, play a role in the development of addiction.
The ''blended model'' attempts to consider elements of all other models in developing a therapeutic approach to dependency. It holds that the mechanism of dependency is different for different individuals, and that each case must be considered on its own merits.
The ''habit model'' proposed by Thomas Szasz questions the very concept of "addiction." He argues that addiction is a metaphor, and that the only reason to make the distinction between habit and addiction "is to persecute somebody."
The genetic neurobiological model called Hypoism. Read about the science behind this and its implications at http: www.nvo.com hypoism. The scientific argument is at: http: www.nvo.com hypoism hypoismhypothesis
Neurobiological basis
The development of addiction is thought to involve a simultaneous process of 1) increased focus on and engagement in a particular behavior and 2) the attenuation or "shutting down" of other behaviors. For example, animals allowed the unlimited ability to self administer psychoactive drugs will show such a strong preference that they will forgo food, sleep, and sex for continued access. The neuro anatomical correlate of this that the brain regions involved in driving goal directed behavior grow increasingly selective for particular motivating stimuli and rewards, to the point that the brain regions involved in the inhibition of behavior can no longer effectively send "stop" signals. A good analogy is to imagine flooring the gas pedal in a car with very bad brakes. In this case, the limbic system is thought to be the major "driving force" and the orbitofrontal cortex is the substrate of the top down inhibition.
A specific portion of the limbic circuit known as the mesolimbic dopaminergic system is hypothesized to play an important role in translation of motivation to motor behavior and reward related learning in particular. It is typically defined as the ventral tegmental area (VTA), the nucleus accumbens, and the bundle of dopamine containing fibres that connecting them. This system is commonly implicated in the seeking out and consumption of rewarding stimuli or events, such as sweet tasting foods or sexual interaction. However, ita importance to addiction research goes beyond its role in "natural" motivation: while the specific site or mechanism of action may differ, all known drugs of abuse have the common effect in that they elevate the level of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens. This may happen directly, such as through blockade of the dopamine re uptake mechanism (see cocaine). It may also happen indirectly, such as through stimulation of the dopamine containing neurons of the VTA that synapse onto neurons in the accumbens (see opiates). The euphoric effects of drugs of abuse are thought to be a direct result of the acute increase in accumbal dopamine.
The human body has a natural tendency to maintain homeostasis, and the central nervous system is no exception. Chronic elevation of dopamine will result in a decrease in the number of dopamine receptors available in a process known as downregulation. The decreased number of receptors changes the permeability of the cell membrane located post synaptically, such that the post synaptic neuron is less excitable ie, less able to respond to chemical signalling with an electrical impulse, or action potential. It is hypothesized that this dulling of the responsiveness of the brain's reward pathways contributes to the inability to feel pleasure, known as anhedonia, often observed in addicts. The increased requirement for dopamine to maintain the same electrical activity is the basis of both physiological tolerance and withdrawal associated with addiction.
Downregulation can be classically conditioned. If a behavior consistently occurs in the same environment or contigently with a particular cue, the brain will adjust to the presence of the conditioned cues by decreasing the number of available receptors in the absence of the behavior. It is thought that many drug overdoses are not the result of a user taking a higher dose than is typical, but rather that the user is administering the same dose in a new environment.
In cases of physical dependency on depressants of the central nervous system such as opioids, barbiturates, or alcohol, the absence of the substance can lead to symptoms of severe physical discomfort. Withdrawal from alcohol or sedatives such as barbiturates or benzodiazepines (valium family) can result in seizures and even death. By contrast, withdrawal from opioids, which can be extremely uncomfortable, is rarely if ever life threatening. In cases of dependence and withdrawal, the body has become so dependent on high concentrations of the particular chemical that it has stopped producing its own natural versions (endogenous ligands) and instead produces opposing chemicals. When the addictive substance is withdrawn, the effects of the opposing chemicals can become overwhelming. For example, chronic use of sedatives (alcohol, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines) results in higher chronic levels of stimulating neurotransmitters such as glutamate. Very high levels of glutamate kill nerve cells (called excitatory neurotoxicity).
Criticism
Levi Bryant has criticized the term and concept of ''addiction'' as counterproductive in psychotherapy as it defines a patient's identity and makes it harder to become a ''non addict''. "The signifier 'addict' doesn't simply describe what I am, but initiates a way of relating to myself that informs how I relate to others."
A stronger form or criticism comes from Thomas Szasz, who denies that addiction is a psychiatric problem. In many of his works, he argues that addiction is a choice, and that a drug addict is one who simply prefers a socially taboo substance rather than, say, a low risk lifestyle. In 'Our Right to Drugs', Szasz cites the biography of Malcolm X to corroborate his economic views towards addiction: Malcolm claimed that quitting cigarettes was harder than shaking his heroine addiction. Szasz postulates that humans always have a choice, and it is foolish to call someone an 'addict' just becuase they prefer a drug induced euphoria to a more popular and socially welcome lifestyle.
A similar conclusion to that of Thomas Szasz may also be reached through very different reasoning. This is the somewhat extreme, yet tenanable, view that humans do not have free will. From this perspective, being 'addicted' to a substance is no different than being 'addicted' to a job that you work everyday. Without the assumption of free will, every human action is the result of the naturally occuring reactions of particle matter in the physical brain, and so there is no longer room for the concept of 'addiction', since, in this view, choice is an illusion of the human experience.
Casual addiction
The word addiction is also sometimes used colloquially to refer to something a person has a passion for. Such "addicts" include:
Biblioholics
Chocoholics
Workaholics
See also
12 step programs
Alcoholics Anonymous
Narcotics Anonymous
Moderation Management
Cold turkey
Junkie
Love hate relationship
Tanha
YES Recovery
Higher order desire
Sexual addiction
Drug addiction
Computer addiction
External links
(freely available online through January 2006)
(2001) a joint statement by the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the American Pain Society, and the American Society of Addiction Medicine
Category:Motivation
Category:Unsolved problems in neuroscience
ca:Addicci
cs:Z vislost
de:Sucht
es:Adicci n
fr:Addiction
ko:
hr:Ovisnost
is:F kn
he:
nl:Verslaving
ja:
pl:Uzale nienie
sv:Beroende
In epistemology, an '''axiom''' is a self evident truth upon which other knowledge must rest, from which other knowledge is built up. Not all epistemologists agree that any axioms, understood in that sense, exist.
In mathematics, an '''axiom''' is ''not'' necessarily a ''self evident'' truth, but rather a formal logical expression used in a deduction to yield further results. Mathematics distinguishes two types of axioms: logical axioms and non logical axioms.
Etymology
The word ''axiom'' comes from the Greek word
(''axioma''), which means that which is deemed worthy or fit or that which is considered self evident. The word comes from (''axioein''), meaning to deem worthy, which in turn comes from (''axios''), meaning worthy. Among the ancient Greek philosophers an axiom was a claim which could be seen to be true without any need for proof.
Mathematics
In the field of mathematical logic, a clear distinction is made between two notions of axioms: '''logical axioms''' and '''non logical axioms'''.
Logical axioms
These are certain formulas in a language that are universally valid, that is, formulas that are satisfied by every structure under every variable assignment function . In colloquial terms, these are statements that are ''true'' in any possible universe, under any possible interpretation and with any assignment of values. Usually one takes as logical axioms some minimal set of tautologies that is sufficient for proving all tautologies in the language.
Examples
In the propositional calculus it is common to take as logical axioms all formulas of the following forms, where math phi math, math psi math, and math chi math can be any formulas of the language:
math phi to ( psi to phi) math
math( phi to ( psi to chi)) to (( phi to psi) to ( phi to chi)) math
math( lnot phi to lnot psi) to ( psi to phi) math
Each of these patterns is an ''axiom schema'', a rule for generating an infinite number of axioms. For example, if mathA math, mathB math, and mathC math are propositional variables, then mathA to (B to A) math and math(A to lnot B) to (C to (A to lnot B)) math are both instances of axiom schema 1, and hence are axioms. It can be shown that with only these three axiom schemata and ''modus ponens'', one can prove all tautologies of the propositional calculus. It can also be shown that no pair of these schemata is sufficient for proving all tautologies with ''modus ponens''.
These axiom schemata are also used in the predicate calculus, but additional logical axioms are needed.
div style "border left: 3px double CCCCCC padding left: 5px "
'''Example.''' Let math mathfrak L , math be a first order language. For each variable mathx , math, the formula
center
mathx x math
center
is universally valid.
div
This means that, for any variable symbol mathx , math, the formula mathx x , math can be regarded as an axiom. Also, in this example, for this not to fall into vagueness and a never ending series of "primitive notions", either a precise notion of what we mean by mathx x , math (or, for all what matters, "to be equal") has to be well established first, or a purely formal and syntactical usage of the symbol math , math has to be enforced, and mathematical logic does indeed do that.
Another, more interesting example, is that which provides us with what is known as '''universal instantiation''':
div style "border left: 3px double CCCCCC padding left: 5px "
'''Example.''' Given a formula math phi , math in a first order language math mathfrak L , math, a variable mathx , math and a term matht , math that is substitutable for mathx , math in math phi , math, the formula
center
math forall x. phi to phi x t math
center
is universally valid.
div
In informal terms, this example allows us to state that, if we know that a certain property mathP , math holds for every mathx , math and that if matht , math stands for a particular object in our structure, then we should be able to claim mathP(t) , math. Again, ''we are claiming that the formula'' math forall x. phi to phi x t math ''is valid'', that is, we must be able to give a "proof" of this fact, or more properly speaking, a ''metaproof''. Actually, these examples are ''metatheorems'' of our theory of mathematical logic since we are dealing with the very concept of ''proof'' itself. Aside from this, we can also have '''existential generalization''':
div style "border left: 3px double CCCCCC padding left: 5px "
'''Axiom scheme.''' Given a formula math phi , math in a first order language math mathfrak L , math, a variable mathx , math and a term matht , math that is substitutable for mathx , math in math phi , math, the formula
center
math phi x t to exists x. phi math
center
is universally valid.
div
Non logical axioms
'''Non logical axioms''' are formulas that play the role of theory specific assumptions. Reasoning about two different structures, for example the natural numbers and the integers, may involve the same logical axioms the non logical axioms aim to capture what is special about a particular structure (or set of structures, such as groups). Thus non logical axioms, unlike logical axioms, are not ''tautologies''. Another name for a non logical axiom is ''postulate''.
Almost every modern mathematical theory starts from a given set of non logical axioms, and it was thought that in principle every theory could be axiomatized in this way and formalized down to the bare language of logical formulas. This turned out to be impossible and proved to be quite a story (''see below'').
Non logical axioms are often simply referred to as ''axioms'' in mathematical discourse. This does not mean that it is claimed that they are true in some absolute sense. For example, in some groups, the group operation is commutative, and this can be asserted with the introduction of an additional axiom, but without this axiom we can do quite well developing (the more general) group theory, and we can even take its negation as an axiom for the study of non commutative groups.
Thus, an ''axiom'' is an elementary basis for a formal logic system that together with the rules of inference define a '''deductive system'''.
Examples
This section gives examples of mathematical theories that are developed entirely from a set of non logical axioms (axioms, henceforth). A rigorous treatment of any of these topics begins with a specification of these axioms.
Basic theories, such as arithmetic, real analysis (sometimes referred to as ''the theory of functions of one real variable''), linear algebra, and complex analysis (a.k.a. ''complex variables''), are often introduced non axiomatically in mostly technical studies, but any rigorous course in these subjects always begins by presenting its axioms.
''Geometries'' such as Euclidean geometry, projective geometry, symplectic geometry. Interestingly one of the results of the fifth Euclidean axiom being a non logical axiom is that the three angles of a triangle do not by definition add to 180 . Only under the umbrella of Euclidean geometry is this always true.
The study of topology in mathematics extends all over through point set topology, algebraic topology, differential topology, and all the related paraphernalia, such as homology theory, homotopy theory.
The development of ''abstract algebra'' brought with itself group theory, rings and fields, Galois theory.
This list could be expanded to include most fields of mathematics, including axiomatic set theory, measure theory, ergodic theory, probability, representation theory, and differential geometry.
Arithmetic
The Peano axioms are the most widely used ''axiomatization'' of arithmetic. They are a set of axioms strong enough to prove many important facts about number theory and they allowed G del to establish his famous second incompleteness theorem.
We have a language math mathfrak L NT 0, S , math where math0 , math is a constant symbol and mathS , math is a unary function and the following axioms:
math forall x. lnot (Sx 0) math
math forall x. forall y. (Sx Sy to x y) math
math(( phi(0) land forall x. ,( phi(x) to phi(Sx))) to forall x. phi(x) math for any math mathfrak L NT , math formula math phi , math with one free variable.
The standard structure is math mathfrak N langle N, 0, S rangle , math where math N , math is the set of natural numbers, mathS , math is the successor function and math0 , math is naturally interpreted as the number 0.
Euclidean geometry
Probably the oldest, and most famous, list of axioms are the 4 1 Euclid's postulates of plane geometry. This set of axioms turns out to be incomplete, and many more postulates are necessary to rigorously characterize his geometry (Hilbert used 23).
The axioms are referred to as "4 1" because for nearly two millennia the fifth (parallel) postulate ("through a point outside a line there is exactly one parallel") was suspected of being derivable from the first four. Ultimately, the fifth postulate was found to be independent of the first four. Indeed, one can assume that no parallels through a point outside a line exist, that exactly one exists, or that infinitely many exist. These choices give us alternative forms of geometry in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to less than, exactly, or more than a straight line respectively and are known as elliptic, Euclidean, and hyperbolic geometries.
Real analysis
The object of study is the real numbers. The real numbers are uniquely picked out (up to isomorphism) by the properties of a ''complete ordered field''. However, expressing these properties as axioms requires use of second order logic. The L wenheim Skolem theorems tell us that if we restrict ourselves to first order logic, any axiom system for the reals admits other models, including both models that are smaller than the reals and models that are larger. Some of the latter are studied in non standard analysis.
span id "role"Role in mathematical logic span
Deductive systems and completeness
A '''deductive system''' consists, of a set math Lambda , math of logical axioms, a set math Sigma , math of non logical axioms, and a set math ( Gamma, phi) , math of ''rules of inference''. A desirable property of a deductive system is that it be '''complete'''. A system is said to be complete if, for all formulas math phi math,
center
if math Sigma models phi math then math Sigma vdash phi math
center
that is, for any statement that is a ''logical consequence'' of math Sigma math there actually exists a ''deduction'' of the statement from math Sigma , math. This is sometimes expressed as "everything that is true is provable", but it must be understood that "true" here means "made true by the set of axioms", and not, for example, "true in the intended interpretation". G del's completeness theorem establishes the completeness of a certain commonly used type of deductive system.
Note that "completeness" has a different meaning here than it does in the context of G del's first incompleteness theorem, which states that no ''recursive'', ''consistent'' set of non logical axioms math Sigma , math of the Theory of Arithmetic is ''complete'', in the sense that there will always exist an arithmetic statement math phi , math such that neither math phi , math nor math lnot phi , math can be proved from the given set of axioms.
There is thus, on the one hand, the notion of '''''completeness of a deductive system''''' and on the other hand that of '''''completeness of a set of non logical axioms'''''. The completeness theorem and the incompleteness theorem, despite their names, do not contradict one another.
Further discussion
Early mathematicians regarded axiomatic geometry as a model of physical space, and obviously there could only be one such model. The idea that alternative mathematical systems might exist was very troubling to mathematicians of the 19th century and the developers of systems such as Boolean algebra made elaborate efforts to derive them from traditional arithmetic. Galois showed just before his untimely death that these efforts were largely wasted, but that the grand parallels between axiomatic systems could be put to good use, as he algebraically solved many classical geometrical problems. Ultimately, the abstract parallels between algebraic systems were seen to be more important than the details and modern algebra was born. In the modern view we may take as axioms any set of formulas we like, as long as they are not known to be inconsistent.
See also
Axiomatic system
Peano axioms
Axiom of choice
Axiom of countability
Axiomatic set theory
Parallel postulate
Continuum hypothesis
Axiomatization
List of axioms
External links
Category:Logic
bg:
be:
ca:Axioma
cs:Axiom
da:Aksiom
de:Axiom
et:Aksioom
es:Axioma
eo:Aksiomo
fa:
fr:Axiome
ko:
hr:Aksiom
io:Axiomo
id:Aksioma
it:Assioma (matematica)
he:
lt:Aksioma
hu:Axi ma
nl:Axioma
ja:
no:Aksiom
pl:Aksjomat
pt:Axioma
ru:
sl:Aksiom
sr:
fi:Aksiooma
sv:Axiom
vi:Ti n
tr:Aksiyom
uk:
zh:
:''For other uses, see Alpha.''
'''Alpha''' (uppercase , lowercase ) is the first letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 1. It derives from the Phoenician letter 'Aleph. Letters that arose from Alpha include the Latin A and the Cyrillic letter A.
Plutarch in ''Moralia'' presents a discussion on the question of why the letter alpha stands first in the alphabet. Plutarch's speaker suggests that Cadmus, the Phoenician who reputedly settled in Thebes and introduced the alphabet to Greece, "placed ''alpha'' first because it is the Phoenician name for ox, which they, like Hesiod, considered not the second or third, but the first of necessities." This refers to a passage in ''Works and Days'' by Hesiod, who advised the early Greek farmers, "First get an ox, then a woman." A simpler explanation is that it was the first letter in the Phoenician alphabet.
According to Plutarch's natural order of attribution of the vowels to the planets, alpha was connected with the Moon. Oxen were also associated with the Moon in both early Sumerian and Egyptian religious symbolism due to the crescent shape of their horns.
Alpha, both as a symbol and term, is used to refer to or describe a variety of things, including the first or most significant occurrence of something. Jesus declares himself to be the "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last." (Revelation 22:13, KJV, and see also 1:8).
The uppercase letter alpha is not generally used as a symbol because it tends to be rendered identically to the uppercase latin A.
The lower case letter is used as the symbol for the following in physics:
Angular acceleration.
The alpha particle and alpha decay.
Molecular polarisability.
Other uses
Alpha is also used to describe the strongest male in a pack of animals, known as the alphamale.
Category:Greek letters
als:
an:Alfa
ast:Alpha
ca:Alfa
da:Alfa (bogstav)
de:Alpha
el:
es:
fr:Alpha
ga:Alfa
gl:Alfa (letra)
ko:
id:Alpha
he:
la:Alpha
nl:Alfa (letter)
nds:Alpha
ja:
no:Alfa
pl:Alfa
pt:
ru: ( )
sk:Alfa (p smeno)
sl:Alfa
sr:
fi:Alfa
sv:Alfa
zh:
'''Alvin Toffler''' (born October 3, 1928) is an American writer and futurist, known for his works discussing the digital revolution, communications revolution, corporate revolution and technological singularity. A former associate editor of ''Fortune'' magazine, his early work focused on technology and its impact (through effects like information overload). Then he moved to examining the reaction of and changes in society. His later focus has been on the increasing power of 21st century military hardware, weapons and technology proliferation, and capitalism. He is married to Heidi Toffler, also a writer and futurist.
His ideas
Toffler explains, "Society needs people who take care of the elderly and who know how to be compassionate and honest. Society needs people who work in hospitals. Society needs all kinds of skill that are not just cognitive they're emotional, they're affectional. You can't run the society on data and computers alone."
In his book ''The Third Wave'' Toffler describes three types of societies, based on the concept of 'waves' each wave pushes the older societies and cultures aside.
First Wave is the society after agrarian revolution and replaced the first hunter gatherer cultures.
The main components of the Second Wave society are nuclear family, factory type education system and the corporation. Toffler writes: "The Second Wave Society is industrial and based on mass production, mass distribution, mass consumption, mass education, mass media, mass recreation, mass entertainment, and weapons of mass destruction. You combine those things with standardization, centralization, concentration, and synchronization, and you wind up with a style of organization we call bureaucracy."
Third Wave is the post industrial society. Toffler would also add that since late 1950s most countries are moving away from a Second Wave Society into what he would call a Third Wave Society. He coined lots of words to describe it and mentions names invented by other people, like the Information Age.
In this post industrial society, there is a lot of diversity in lifestyles ("subcults").
Adhocracies (fluid organizations like, say, the Wikipedia community) adapt quickly to changes.
Information can substitute most of the material resources (see ersatz) and becomes the main material for workers (cognitarians instead of proletarians), who are loosely affiliated.
Mass customization offers the possibility of cheap, personalized, production catering to small niches (see Just In Time production).
The gap between producer and consumer is bridged by technology.
"Prosumers" can fill their own needs (see open source, assembly kit, freelance work).
Since the 1960s, people have been trying to make sense of the impact of new technologies and social change. Toffler's writings have been influential beyond the confines of scientific, economic and public policy discussions. Techno music pioneer Juan Atkins cites Toffler's phrase "techno rebels" in ''Future Shock'' as inspiring him to use the word "techno" to describe the musical style he helped to create.
Toffler's works and ideas have been subject to various criticism, usually with the same argumentation used against futurology, that is that foreseeing the future is nigh impossible. In the 1990s, his ideas were publicly lauded by Newt Gingrich.
His books
A few of his well known works are:
''Future Shock'' (1970) Bantam Books ISBN 0553277375
''The Eco Spasm Report'' (1975) Bantam Books ISBN 055314474X
''The Third Wave'' (1980) Bantam Books ISBN 0553246984
''Previews Premises'' (1983)
''Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth and Violence at the Edge of the 21st Century'' (1990) Bantam Books ISBN 0553292153
''War and Anti War'' (1995) Warner Books ISBN 0446602590
''The Shockwave Rider'' is a science fiction novel inspired by his ''Future Shock''.
See also
Daniel Bell
Norman Swan
The National Committee For U.S. China Relations
The U.S. Committee for Unifem
The United Nations Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
The RAND Corporation
The Progress and Freedom Foundation
The Institute for Policy Studies
The United Nations
The World Trade Organization
The Pentagon
Techno
Toffler, Alvin
Toffler, Alvin
Toffler, Alvin
af:Alvin Toffler
de:Alvin Toffler
es:Alvin Toffler
it:Alvin Toffler
ro:Alvin Toffler
ru: ,
sv:Alvin Toffler
: ''The Amazing Spider Man is a comics series. For other uses see The Amazing Spider Man (disambiguation).''
.
'''''The Amazing Spider Man''''' is the title of a comic book published by Marvel Comics, a television program and a daily newspaper comic strip. All three feature the adventures of the superhero Spider Man.
Comic book
Spider Man originally appeared in issue 15 of the comic book ''Amazing Fantasy'', its final issue. The series was cancelled with that issue, but response to the character was so positive that the new title, ''The Amazing Spider Man'' was launched, issue 1 appearing in March 1963.
The character was created by writer editor Stan Lee and artist cowriter Steve Ditko, and the pair produced 38 issues of ''Amazing''. A disagreement over a story led to Ditko leaving the title after that point. He was replaced by penciller John Romita who illustrated Lee's stories for several years. Although many fans thought that the writing quality almost instantly plummeted, the series became still more popular.
Many writers and artists have taken over the monthly comic over the years chronicling the adventures of Marvel's most identifiable hero. The title was published continuously until 1998 when Marvel Comics decided to begin anew by renumbering the title with a new issue 1 published in January, 1999. In 2003 this new title reverted to using the numbering of the original series, at issue 500.
As of October 2005, ''The Amazing Spider Man'' is participating in "The Other", a 12 part crossover, which will conclude in January 2006.
Black Issue
An issue of Amazing Spider Man (Vol. 2) called "The Black Issue" explores how Spider Man and other heroes would react to the September 11, 2001 attacks written by J. Michael Straczynski and penciled by John Romita, Jr. It starts with a double page spread of the devastation and of Spidey holding his head in pain anguish disbelief, his only word "...God..." The issue continues as Spidey swings down to help in the aftermath. Joining with other heroes in the rescue efforts, Spidey explores the wreckage and the broken hearts and his thoughts drive on, thinking through it all. At some point his thoughts become Straczynski's reflections and response. The script journeys from horror, pain and loss to end on strength.
See also List of ''The Amazing Spider Man'' comics
Television program
Spidey got his shot at live action TV stardom in April 1977, when he debuted in the "Amazing Spider Man" TV series. Nicholas Hammond portrayed Peter Parker Spider Man in the short lived series, which had started out as a slew of TV movies, obviously made to capitalize on the The Incredible Hulk television series. The show was canceled a year after its debut.
Newspaper comic strip
The daily newspaper comic strip began on January 3, 1977. It was first written by Spider Man co creator Stan Lee and illustrated by John Romita. The strip was surprisingly successful in an era with few serialized adventure strips. The strip slowly grew in circulation and as of 2006 is still being published. Lee's brother Larry Lieber illustrated and later wrote the strip for much of its run. While the strip and the comic book feature the same characters, they do not share the same continuity, and the strip has had a decreased emphasis on supervillain enemies. A rare exception was the 1987 wedding of Peter Parker and Mary Jane Watson which occurred in both the comic book and the comic strip. Guest stars in the newspaper strip include Wolverine and Dr. Strange. Villains include Dr. Doom, Kraven the Hunter, and The Rhino. Stories from the strip have been reprinted in paperback and in Comics Revue magazine.
Video and computer games
Numerous video and computer games have been released whereby the player controlled Spider Man and had to do battle with various enemies.
Trivia
The 2004 movie ''Spider Man 2'' was at one point tentatively titled ''The Amazing Spider Man''.
External links
Category:Spider Man titles
Amazing Spider Man, The
fr:Amazing Spider man
'''Archie''' may refer to:
Archie Andrews (puppet) Ventriloquist's puppet
Archie Bunker a sitcom character from the 1970s.
Archie Comics a comic book publisher specializing in teen humor
Archie Andrews (comics) Main character in Archie Comics
Archie search engine a search engine for FTP sites, named after the comic series, launched in the early 1990s.
Archie, Missouri city located in Cass County, Missouri.
A slang term for anti aircraft fire used by the British Royal Flying Corps and Royal Air Force.
Archie Linux a LiveCD version of Arch Linux
Archie leader of Team Aqua in the Pok mon series
Archie MacPherson Scottish sports broadcaster.
'''AM''' may refer to:
AM broadcasting, radio broadcasting using Amplitude Modulation
AM (fictional computer), a fictional evil supercomputer in the short story ''I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream''
''Ante Meridiem'', in 12 hour clock notation, Latin for "before noon"
''Anno Mundi'', a Calendar era counting from the creation of the world
Armenia (ISO country code AM)
Anguilla (MARC country code am)
Aerom xico (IATA airline designator)
Air Marshal, a military rank in the Royal Air Force and many Commonwealth air forces
Air Medal, a military decoration
Airmail
Artium Magister, alternative abbrevation for a Master's degree in Arts
Amazonas State, Brazil
Americium, a chemical element with symbol Am
Amharic language (ISO 639 1 language code am)
Amran Governorate, Yemen (ISO 3166 2:YE)
''Anno Martyrum'', used in the Coptic calendar
Arkansas and Missouri Railroad, a short line railroad headquartered in Springdale, Arkansas
Arthur Merlin protocol, an interactive proof system in computational complexity theory
Asia Miles, a Cathay Pacific travel reward programme
Attometre (am), a unit of length (equal to 10supsmall 18 small sup m)
Automated Mathematician, an artificial intelligence program
Minesweeper (ship), U.S. Navy 1921 warship classification code
Order of Australia member (postnominal)
A minor (Am), a minor chord in music
Assembly Member of the National Assembly for Wales or London Assembly
"Away message", see status message (IM)
ca:Am
da:AM (flertydig)
de:Am
es:Am
fr:AM
ko:AM
it:Am
nl:Am
ja:AM
pl:AM
pt:AM
sl:Am
sv:AM
vi:AM
Category:1996 books
Category:Alice derived works
'''Automated Alice''' is a novel by Jeff Noon, written 1996.
Noon presents it as a ''trequel'' to the Lewis Carroll books, ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'' and ''Through the Looking Glass''. This illustrated novella follows Alice's journey to a future Manchester populated by Newmonians, Civil Serpents and a vanishing cat named Quark.
'''Antigua and Barbuda''' is an island nation located in the eastern Caribbean Sea on the boundary with the Atlantic Ocean. Antigua () and Barbuda ()are located in the middle of the Leeward Islands in the Eastern Caribbean, roughly 17 degrees north of the equator. Antigua and Barbuda are part of the Lesser Antilles archipelago with the archipelago of Guadeloupe to the south, Montserrat to the southwest, Saint Kitts and Nevis to the west and Saint Barth lemy and Saint Martin to the northwest.
History
''Main article: History of Antigua and Barbuda''
Pre ceramic Amerindians were the first to inhabit the islands of Antigua and Barbuda in 2400 BC. Later Arawak and Carib Amerindian tribes populated the islands. The island of Antigua was originally named Wadadli by the natives. Christopher Columbus landed on his second voyage in 1493 and gave the island the name Antigua. Early settlements by the Spanish and French were succeeded by the English who formed a colony in 1667 by transporting Irish Catholic slaves to Antigua. Slavery, established to run the sugar plantations on Antigua, was abolished in 1834.
The islands became an independent state within the Commonwealth of Nations on 1 November 1981, and Vere Bird became the first prime minister.
Politics
''Main article:'' Politics of Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda is a Commonwealth Realm and the head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who is represented in Antigua and Barbuda by a governor general. Executive power is in the hands of the prime minister, who is also the head of government. The prime minister is usually the leader of the winning party of the elections for the House of Representatives (17 members), held every five years. The other chamber of the parliament, the Senate, has 17 members which are appointed by the governor general. Its current prime minister is Baldwin Spencer (24 March 2004 ).
Administrative Divisions
''Main article: Parishes and dependencies of Antigua and Barbuda''
The island of Antigua is divided into six parishes:
small1 small Saint George
small2 small Saint John
small3 small Saint Mary
small4 small Saint Paul
small5 small Saint Peter
small6 small Saint Philip
The island of Barbuda and the uninhabited island of Redonda each enjoy dependency status.
Geography
:''Main article: Geography of Antigua and Barbuda''
The country consists of a number of islands, of which Antigua is the largest one, and the most populated. Barbuda, just north of Antigua is the other main island. The islands have a warm, tropical climate, with fairly constant temperatures year round. The un inhabited island of Redonda also belongs to the nation of Antigua and Barbuda.
The islands are mostly low lying, with the highest point being Boggy Peak, at 402 metres (1,319 ft). The small country's main town is the capital Saint John's on Antigua Barbuda's largest town is Codrington.
Economy
''Main article: Economy of Antigua and Barbuda''
Tourism dominates its economy, accounting for more than half of its GDP. Weak tourist arrival numbers since early 2000 have slowed the economy, however, and pressed the government into a tight fiscal corner. The dual island nation's agricultural production is focused on the domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a labour shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and construction work.
Manufacturing comprises enclave type assembly for export with major products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components. Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialised world, especially in the United States, which accounts for about one third of all tourist arrivals.
Demographics
''Main article: Demographics of Antigua and Barbuda''
Most of the population are descendants of the slaves that used to work in the sugar plantations, but there are also groups of Europeans, notably Irish, British and Portuguese. While the official language is English, most of the locals speak patois, a form of Creole English.
Almost all Antiguans are Christians, with the Anglican Church (about 44 ) being the largest denomination.
Foreign relations
''Main article: Foreign relations of Antigua and Barbuda''
Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the Caribbean Community, United Nations, World Trade Organization, Commonwealth of Nations, Organization of American States, Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System.
Miscellaneous topics
Communications in Antigua and Barbuda
Culture of Antigua and Barbuda
Music of Antigua and Barbuda
Military of Antigua and Barbuda
Transportation in Antigua and Barbuda
See also
Caribbean Community
Lesser Antilles
List of sovereign states
References
"" cite. CIA World Factbook, accessed 28 February 2005.
External links
, its Department of Tourism website
, United States Library of Congress Portals on the World
, Antigua news weather
. Tourism, business, history and culture, politics an up to date website.
with great photo galleries.
includes articles on accommodations, transportation, dining, and weather.
br
Category:Island nations
Category:CARICOM member states
Category:Members of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category:Former British colonies
! interwiki
an:Antigua y Barbuda
bg:
zh min nan:Antigua kap Barbuda
bn:
bs:Antigva i Barbuda
ca:Antigua i Barbuda
cs:Antigua a Barbuda
da:Antigua og Barbuda
de:Antigua und Barbuda
et:Antigua ja Barbuda
es:Antigua y Barbuda
eo:Antigvo Barbudo
fr:Antigua et Barbuda
gl:Antiga e Barbuda Antigua and Barbuda
ko:
hr:Antigva i Barbuda
io:Antiga e Barbuda
id:Antigua dan Barbuda
is:Ant gva og Barb da
it:Antigua e Barbuda
he:
lv:Antigva un Barbuda
lt:Antigva ir Barbuda
hu:Antigua s Barbuda
ku:Antig a Berb da
ms:Antigua dan Barbuda
na:Antigua me Barbuda
nl:Antigua en Barbuda
nds:Antigua un Barbuda
ja:
no:Antigua og Barbuda
nn:Antigua og Barbuda
pl:Antigua i Barbuda
pt:Ant gua e Barbuda
ro:Antigua i Barbuda
ru:
sa:
sq:Antigua dhe Barbuda
simple:Antigua and Barbuda
sk:Antigua a Barbuda
sl:Antigva in Barbuda
sr:
fi:Antigua ja Barbuda
sv:Antigua och Barbuda
tl:Antigua at Barbuda
tr:Antigua ve Barbuda
uk:
zh:
Infobox Film name A Man for All Seasons, TV and cinematic films
image A Man for All Seasons DVD cover.jpg
caption A Man for All Seasons
director Fred Zinnemann
producer Fred Zinnemann
writer Robert Bolt
starring Paul ScofieldbrWendy HillerbrLeo McKern
music Georges Delerue
cinematography
editing
distributor Columbia Pictures
released December 12, 1966
runtime 120 min
language English
budget 3,900,000 (estimated)
imdb id 0060665
'''''A Man for All Seasons''''' is a play by Robert Bolt, first performed in London on July 1 1960. It has subsequently been made into a feature film and a television movie.
The plot is based on the true story of Sir Thomas More, the 16th century Chancellor of England, who refuses to endorse or denounce the king's wish to divorce his aging wife so that he can marry his mistress. The King is Henry VIII of England and his wife is Catherine of Aragon, the first of an eventual six.
The play portrays More as a man of principle, envied by rivals such as Thomas Cromwell and loved by the common people and by his family.
) is accused of high treason by Cromwell (Leo McKern) 1966 film Paul Scofield, who played the leading role in the West End, reprised it on Broadway in 1962, winning a Tony Award, and played More again in the first of two film versions (1966), winning an Oscar in the process. The film also stars Robert Shaw as Henry VIII, Orson Welles as Wolsey, a young John Hurt as More's nemesis Richard Rich, and an older Wendy Hiller as More's second wife. It was directed by Fred Zinnemann. In addition to the Best Actor Oscar won by Scofield, the film won Academy Awards for screenplay, cinematography, costume design, Best Director, and Best Picture.
The 1988 version stars Charlton Heston (who also directed it) as More, Vanessa Redgrave (who appeared briefly in the 1966 version as Anne Boleyn) as More's wife, and Sir John Gielgud as Cardinal Wolsey.
More recently, the play has been staged in London's West End at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket starring Martin Shaw and produced by Bill Kenwright. It closes on 1 April 2006.
Quotation
'''Alice:''' Arrest him!
'''More:''' Why, what has he done?
'''Margaret:''' He's bad!
'''More:''' There is no law against that.
'''Roper:''' There is! God's law!
'''More:''' Then God can arrest him.
'''Roper:''' Sophistication upon sophistication.
'''More:''' No, sheer simplicity. The law, Roper, the law. I know what's legal, not what's right. And I'll stick to what's legal.
'''Roper:''' Then you set man's law above God's!
'''More:''' No, far below but let me draw your attention to a fact I'm not God. The currents and eddies of right and wrong, which you find such plain sailing, I can't navigate. I'm no voyager. But in the thickets of the law, oh, there I'm a forrester.I doubt if there's a man alive who could follow me there, thank God.
'''Alice:''' While you talk, he's gone!
'''More:''' And go he should, if he was the Devil himself, until he broke the law!
'''Roper:''' So now you'd give the Devil benefit of law!
'''More:''' Yes. What would you do? Cut a great road through the law to get after the Devil?
'''Roper:''' I'd cut down every law in England to do that!
'''More:''' Oh? And when the last law was down, and the Devil turned round on you, where would you hide, Roper, the laws all being flat? This country's planted thick with laws from coast to coast man's laws, not God's and if you cut them down and you're just the man to do it do you really think you could stand upright in the winds that would blow then? Yes, I'd give the Devil benefit of law, for my own safety's sake.
'''More:''' It profits a man nothing to give his soul for the whole world ... but for Wales, Richard?
Redirections
A Man for All Seasons, play
A Man for All Seasons, film
External links
at
'''' (1966) at the list
.
succession box
title Academy Award for Best Picture
years 1966
before ''The Sound of Music''
after ''In the Heat of the Night''
Man for All Seasons, A
! Paul Scofield
! Robert Shaw
! Wendy Hiller
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
Man for All Seasons, A
:''For other uses of Agincourt, see Agincourt.''
'''Azincourt''' (sometimes: '''Agincourt''') is a village and commune of northern France in the Pas de Calais ''d partment'', 14 miles to the north west of Saint Pol sur Ternoise by road, famous on account of the victory, on October 25 1415, of Henry V of England over the French in the Battle of Agincourt. Population (1999): 276.
The original museum of the battle featuring model knights fabricated from Action Man has given way to a more professional space with slide shows, audio commentary's and some interactive elements. The museum building is itself modelled on the English longbow of the English soldiers.
Category:Communes of Pas de Calais
fr:Azincourt
it:Azincourt
nl:Azincourt
pl:Azincourt
sr:
sv:Agincourt
:''For the son of Albert Speer, also an architect, see Albert Speer (the younger)''
(March 19, 1905 September 1, 1981) was born ''Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer'' in Mannheim, Germany, the second of three sons. He is sometimes called 'the first architect of the Third Reich'. He was Hitler's chief architect in Nazi Germany and in 1942 became Hitler's minister of armaments, when he had considerable success in reforming and streamlining Germany's war production. After the war he was tried at Nuremberg where he expressed remorse and was sentenced to 20 years in prison. After his release, he became a successful author, writing a number of semi autobiographical works until his death in 1981 from a cerebral hemorrhage.
Early years
Although Speer originally wanted to become a mathematician when he was young, he ended up following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture. He began his architectural studies at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology his decision to study locally instead of at one of the more prestigious institutes was dictated by the inflation of 1923. In 1924 when the inflation had stabilised, Speer transferred his studies to the more esteemed Munich Institute of Technology. In 1925 he transferred again, this time to the Berlin Institute of Technology. It was there that he was under the tutelage of Heinrich Tessenow, Speer had a high regard for Tessenow and when he passed his exams in 1927 he became Tessenow's assistant. His duties as assistant involved teaching seminar classes three days a week. Although Tessenow himself never agreed with Nazism, a number of his students did, and it was they who persuaded Speer to attend a Nazi Party rally in a Berlin beer hall in December 1930.
Speer claims to have been apolitical as a young man nevertheless, he did attend the rally. He was surprised to find Hitler dressed in a neat blue suit, rather than the brown uniform seen on Nazi Party posters. Speer claimed to have been quite affected, not only with Hitler's proposed solutions to the threat of communism and his renunciation of the Treaty of Versailles, but also with the man himself. Several weeks later he attended another rally, though this one was presided over by Joseph Goebbels. Speer was disturbed by the way he had whipped the crowd into a frenzy, playing on their hopes. Although Goebbels' performance offended Speer, he could not shake the impressions Hitler made on him. The next day he joined the Nazi Party as member number 474,481. In this same year (1931) he married Margarete Weber.
Speer's first major commission as a Party member came in 1932 when Karl Hanke (whose villa Speer previously worked on) recommended him to Goebbels to help renovate the new District Headquarters in Berlin, and, later, to renovate Goebbels' Propaganda Ministry. Goebbels was impressed with his work and recommended him to Hitler, who assigned him to help Paul Troost renovate the Chancellery in Berlin. Speer's most notable work on this assignment was the addition of the famous balcony from which Hitler often presented himself to crowds that assembled below. Speer subsequently became a prominent member of Hitler's inner circle and a very close friend to him, winning a special place with Hitler that was unique amongst the Nazi leadership. Hitler, according to Speer, was very contemptuous towards anybody he viewed as part of the bureaucracy, and prized fellow artists like Speer whom he felt a certain kinship with, especially as Hitler himself had previously entertained architectural ambitions.
First Architect of the Reich
When Troost died in 1934, Speer was chosen to replace him as the Party's chief architect. One of his first commissions after promotion was perhaps the most familiar of his designs: the Zeppelintribune, the Nuremberg parade grounds seen in Leni Riefenstahl's propaganda masterpiece, ''Triumph of the Will''. In his autobiography, Speer claimed that, upon seeing the original design, he made a derogatory remark to the effect that the parade ground would resemble a "rifle club" meet. He was then challenged to create a new design.
The grounds were based on ancient Doric architecture of the Pergamon Altar in Anatolia, but magnified to an enormous scale, capable of holding two hundred and forty thousand people. At the 1934 Party rally on the parade grounds, Speer surrounded the site with one hundred and thirty anti aircraft searchlights. This created the effect of a "cathedral of light," (which referenced columns) or, as it was called by British Ambassador Sir Neville Henderson, a "cathedral of ice".
Nuremberg was also to be the site of many more official Nazi buildings, most of which were never built for example, the German Stadium would have held another four hundred thousand spectators as the site of the Aryan Games, a proposed replacement for the Olympic Games. While planning these buildings, Speer invented the theory of "ruin value." According to this theory, enthusiastically supported by Hitler, all new buildings would be constructed in such a way that they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins thousands of years in the future. Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of the Third Reich, just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of their civilizations.
! Image with unknown copyright status removed: .
In 1937 Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris. Speer's work was located directly across from the Soviet Pavilion and was designed to represent a massive defense against the onslaught of communism. Both pavilions were awarded gold medals for their designs.
Speer was also directed to make plans to rebuild Berlin, which was to become the capital of a "Greater Germany" Welthauptstadt Germania. The first step in these plans was the Olympic Stadium for the 1936 Summer Olympics, designed by Werner March. Speer also designed the new Reichs Chancellery, which included a vast hall designed to be twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles. Hitler wanted him to build a third, even larger Chancellery, although it was never begun. The second Chancellery was damaged by the Battle of Berlin in 1945 and was eventually demolished by the Soviet occupiers after the war.
in Paris, June 23, 1940.
Almost none of the other buildings planned for Berlin were ever built. Berlin was to be reorganized along a central three mile (five km) long avenue. At the north end, Speer planned to build the ''Volkshalle'' an enormous domed building, based on St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. The dome of the building would have been impractically large it would be over seven hundred feet (over two hundred meters) high and eight hundred feet (three hundred meters) in diameter, sixteen times larger than the dome of St. Peter's. At the southern end of the avenue would be an arch based on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, but again, much larger it would be almost four hundred feet (120 m) high, and the Arc de Triomphe would have been able to fit inside its opening. The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the abandonment of these plans.
During his involvement in the rebuilding of Berlin, he was allegedly responsible for the forced evictions of Jews from their houses to make room for his grand plans, and for re housing German citizens affected by this work. He was also listed as being present at the 1943 Posen Conference, a charge Speer later contested by saying that he had in fact left early.
Speer did have an architectural rival: Hermann Giesler, whom Hitler also favored. There were frequent clashes between the two in regard to architectural matters and in closeness to Hitler.
Minister of Armaments
Hitler was always a strong supporter of Speer, in part because of Hitler's own frustrated artistic and architectural visions. A strong affinity developed between Hitler and the ambitious young architect early in their professional relationship. For Speer, serving as architect for the head of the German state and being given virtual ''carte blanche'' as to expenses, presented a tremendous opportunity. For Hitler, Speer seemed to be capable of translating Hitler's grandiose visions into tangible designs which expressed what Hitler felt were National Socialist principles.
After Minister of Armaments and War Production Fritz Todt was killed in an airplane crash in 1942, Hitler appointed Speer as his successor in all of his posts. Hitler's affinity for Speer and the architect's efficiency and avoidance of party squabbling are believed to have been considerations in Speer's promotion. In his autobiography, Speer recounts that the power hungry but lazy Hermann G ring raced to Hitler's headquarters upon word of Todt's death, hoping to claim the office. Hitler instead presented G ring with the ''fait accompli'' of Speer's appointment.
Faced with this new responsibility, Speer tried to put the German economy on a war footing comparable to that of the Allied nations, but found himself incessantly hindered by party politics and lack of cooperation from the Nazi hierarchy. Nevertheless, by slowly centralizing almost all industry control and cutting through the dense bureaucracy, he succeeded in multiplying war production four times over the next two and a half years, with it actually reaching its peak in 1944 during the height of the Allied strategic bombing campaign. Another big hurdle in his way was the Nazi policy excluding women from factory work, a serious hindrance in war production and a problem unknown to Germany's enemies, who all made full use of the female workforce. To fill this gap, Speer made heavy use of foreign labor, a considerable portion of it forced labor.
Speer was considered one of the more "rational" members of the Nazi hierarchy, in contrast to the raging Hitler, grotesque G ring, fanatical Goebbels, and perverse Himmler.
Speer's name was found on the list of members of a post Hitler government envisioned by the July 20 plot to kill Hitler.
However, the list had an annotation "if possible" by his name, which Speer credits with helping save his life from the extensive purges that followed the scheme's failure.
By his own account, Speer considered assassinating Hitler in 1945 by releasing poison gas into the air intake vent on the F hrerbunker, but backed down for a number of reasons. Independent evidence for this is sparse. Some credit his revelation of this plan at the Nuremberg trials as being pivotal in sparing him the death sentence, which the Soviets had pushed for.
Hitler continued to consider Speer trustworthy, though this trust waned near the war's end as Speer, at considerable risk, campaigned clandestinely to prevent the implementation of Hitler's scorched earth policy on both German soil and occupied territories. Speer worked in association with General Gotthard Heinrici, whose troops fighting in the east retreated to the American held lines and surrendered there instead of following Hitler's orders to make what would have been a suicidal effort to hold off the Soviets from Berlin.
Speer even confessed to Hitler shortly before the dictator's suicide that he had disobeyed, and indeed actively hindered, Hitler's "scorched earth" decree.
According to Speer's autobiography, Speer visited the F hrerbunker towards the end and stated gently but bluntly to Hitler that the war was lost and expressed his opposition to the systematic destruction of Germany while reaffirming his affection and faith in Hitler. This conversation, it is said, brought Hitler to tears. In disfavor, Speer was excluded from the new cabinet Hitler outlined in his final political testament, where Speer was to be replaced by his subordinate, Karl Otto Saur.
After the war
Nuremberg trials
Immediately after the war, there seemed to be little indication that Speer would be charged with war crimes. Speer traveled unprotected and openly participated in the so called Flensburg government for weeks, in the presence of Allied officers. Upon request, he actually held a series of widely attended lectures for officials of the Allied occupying powers on various topics, including the mistakes made by the Nazi government in industrial and economic affairs (although he never during these lectures spoke about slave labor) and the effectiveness of the Allied strategic bombing campaigns. Some journalists and spectators even expected that Speer would be appointed by the occupying powers to help restore Germany's economy. However, any such speculation ended when, after one of these lectures, he was arrested and sent to Nuremberg for trial.
At the Nuremberg trials after the war Speer was one of the few officials to express remorse and plead guilty, but was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in Spandau Prison, West Berlin, largely for his use of slave labor. At the trials, the prosecution introduced as evidence a photograph of Speer visiting the Mauthausen concentration camp, where he is clearly shown surrounded by emaciated prisoners. The prosecution claimed this proved Speer was well aware of the Holocaust. However, Speer held that he was only given a "V.I.P." tour of the concentration camp, meaning he was never shown the more vile side of the camp's purpose.
According to interviews after his imprisonment, as well as his memoirs, Speer adopted a "see no evil" attitude towards the Nazi atrocities. For example, through one of his friends, Karl Hanke, he learned of Auschwitz and the large number of deaths taking place there. He then purposely avoided visiting the camp or trying to get more information on what was taking place. In his autobiography, he claims that he had no direct involvement or knowledge of the Holocaust, although he faults himself for blinding himself to its existence. He certainly was aware, at least, of harsh conditions for the slave labor and some critics believe that his books understate his role in the atrocities of the era. suggest that Speer knew a lot more about the atrocities than he was telling, but hard evidence for that remains very thin.
One problem with assessments of Speer's complicity in the Holocaust comes from his status in post war Germany he became a symbol for people who were involved with the Nazi regime yet did not have (or claimed not to have had) any part in the regime's atrocities. Even today, German historians such as Joachim Fest tend to have a high opinion of him, while non German historians take a lower view. As film director Heinrich Breloer remarked in the above linked article:
::'' Speer created a market for people who said "believe me, I didn't know anything about the Holocaust . Just look at the F hrer's friend, he didn't know about it either."''
Imprisonment
:''Main article: Spandau Prison''
His time in prison, painstakingly documented in his secret prison diary which was later released as ''The Spandau Diaries'', was described as consisting mainly of a mind numbing and pedantically enforced daily routine, incessant petty personal rivalry between the seven prisoners, a pervasive and bloated prison bureaucracy, and the passing of many false hopes of premature release. After some time Speer, and most of the others, had established secret lines of communication to the outside world via sympathetic prison staff. Speer made full use of this by, amongst other things, writing innumerable letters to his family (which were restricted to one outgoing page per month under official regulation) and even having money spent on his behalf from a special bank account for a variety of benign purposes.
Speer, as recounted in his diary, made a deliberate effort to make as productive use of his time as possible. In the first decade, this took the form of putting on paper the first draft of his tell all memoirs, an act Speer considered to be his "duty" to history and his people, he being the sole surviving member of Hitler's inner circle and in possession of knowledge and a degree of objectivity that no other had. As the prison directors both forbade the writing of a memoir and recorded each sheet of paper given to the prisoners, he wrote much of his memoir secretly on toilet paper, tobacco wrappings, and any other material he could get his hands on, and then had the pages systematically smuggled out.
All the while Speer devoted much of his energy and time towards reading books from the prison library, which was organized by fellow prisoner and ex Grand Admiral Erich Raeder. Speer was, more so than the others, a voracious reader and he completed well over 500 books in the first three years alone. His tastes ranged from Greek drama to famous plays to architectural books and journals, partly from which he collected information for a book he intended to write on the history and function of windows in architecture.
Later, Speer took to the prison garden for enjoyment and work. Heretofore the garden was divided up into small personal plots for each prisoner with the produce of the garden being used in the prison kitchen. When regulations began to slacken in this regard, Speer was allowed to build an ambitious garden, complete with a meandering path, rock garden, and a wide variety of flowers. The garden was even, humorously, centered around a "north south axis", which was to be the core design element of Speer and Hitler's new Berlin. Speer then took up a "walking tour of the world" by ordering geography and travel books from the local library and walking laps in the prison garden visualizing his journey. Meticulously calculating every metre traveled, he began in northern Germany, went through the Balkans, Persia, India, and Siberia, then crossed the Bering Strait and continued southwards, finally ending his sentence in central Mexico.
Release
His release from prison in 1966 was a world wide media event. He then revised and published the several semi autobiographical books he had begun in prison. His books, most notably ''Inside the Third Reich'' and ''The Spandau Diaries'', which were secretly written during his incarceration and systematically smuggled out, provide a unique and personal look into the personalities of the Nazi era and have become much valued by historians. Speer died of a cerebral hemorrhage in London, England, on September 1, 1981 exactly 42 years after World War II began.
Speer's son, also named Albert, became a successful architect in his own right, and was responsible for the design of Expo 2000 (the world exposition that took place in Hanover in the year 2000), design of the Shanghai International Automobile City and the Beijing Olympic complex. His daughter Hilde Schramm became a noted left wing parliamentarian.
See also
Inside the Third Reich
List of Adolf Hitler books
Nazi architecture
Notes
cite book
last Fishman first Jack
title Long Knives and Short Memories: The Spandau Prison Story
publisher Breakwater Books
year 1986
id ISBN 0920911005
pages pg 129
Resources
Works
cite book
last Speer first Albert
authorlink Albert Speer
year 1970
title Inside the Third Reich
publisher Simon Schuster
id ISBN 0684829495
cite book
last Speer first Albert
authorlink Albert Speer
year 1976
title Spandau: The Secret Diaries
publisher Macmillan
id ISBN 0026995018
cite book
last Speer first Albert
authorlink Albert Speer
year 1981
title Infiltration: How Heinrich Himmler Schemed to Build an SS Industrial Empire
publisher Macmillan
id ISBN 0026128004
Biographies
cite book
author Joachim Fest, Ewald Osers (translator), Alexandra Dring
year 2002
title Speer: The Final Verdict
publisher Harcourt
id ISBN 0151005567
cite book
first Dan last van der Vat
authorlink Dan van der Vat
year 1997
title The Good Nazi: The Life and Lies of Albert Speer
publisher George Weidenfeld Nicholson
id ISBN 0297817213
cite book
first Gitta last Sereny
authorlink Gitta Sereny
year 1995
title Albert Speer: His Battle With Truth
publisher Knopf
id ISBN 0394529154
cite book
first Matthias last Schmidt
authorlink Matthias Schmidt
year 1984
title Albert Speer: The End of a Myth
publisher St Martins Press
id ISBN 031201709X
External links
German docudrama broadcast in May 2005, presenting new incriminating evidence of Speer's role, e.g. in the construction of Auschwitz. In German
Speer, Albert
Speer, Albert
Speer, Albert
Speer, Albert
Speer, Albert
Category:Nazi architecture
Speer, Albert
Speer, Albert
br:Albert Speer
da:Albert Speer
de:Albert Speer
el:
es:Albert Speer
fr:Albert Speer (senior)
it:Albert Speer
he:
ka: ,
hu:Albert Speer
nl:Albert Speer
ja:
no:Albert Speer
pl:Albert Speer (ojciec)
pt:Albert Speer
ru: ,
sl:Albert Speer
fi:Albert Speer
sv:Albert Speer
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Alliaceae
image Ipheion uniflorum5.jpg
image width 250px
image caption ''Ipheion uniflorum''
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Liliopsida
ordo Asparagales
familia '''Alliaceae'''
subdivision ranks Genera
subdivision
See text.
'''Alliaceae''' is a family of herbaceous perennial plants. They are monocots, part of order Asparagales.
Genus ''Allium'' includes several important food plants, including onions (''Allium cepa''), chives (''A. schoenoprasum''), garlic (''A. sativum'' and ''A. scordoprasum''), and leeks (''A. porrum'').
The Alliaceae are closely related to two other families in the order Asparagales, the amaryllis family (Amaryllidaceae) and the family Agapanthaceae, which includes the single genus ''Agapanthus''. Based on the close relationship between the three families, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group recognizes the alternative of including the Amaryllidaceae and the Agapanthaceae in family Alliaceae.
Genera
Several genera that were historically classified in the Alliaceae, including ''Androstephium'', ''Bessera'', ''Bloomeria'', ''Brodiaea'', ''Dandya'', ''Dichelostemma'', ''Milla'', ''Petronymphe'', ''Triteleia'', and ''Triteleiopsis'', are now increasingly thought to represent a separate family, Themidaceae.
''Allium''br
''Ancrumia''br
''Caloscordum''br
''Erinna''br
''Garaventia''br
''Gethyum''br
''Gilliesia''br
''Ipheion''br
''Leucocoryne''br
''Miersia''br
''Milula''br
''Muilla''br
''Nectaroscordum''br
''Nothoscordum''br
''Solaria (genus)''br
''Speea''br
''Trichlora''br
''Tristagma''br
''Tulbhagia''br
''Zoelnerallium''br
Category:Plant families
Category:Asparagales
bg:
da:L g familien
de:Zwiebelgew chse
fr:Alliaceae
lt: esnakiniai augalai
nl:Uienfamilie
pt:Alliaceae
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Sunflowers
image Aster alpinus.JPG
image width 250px
image caption ''Aster alpinus''
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Magnoliopsida
ordo Asterales
familia '''Asteraceae'''
familia authority Martynov, 1820
synonyms ''Compositae'' smallGiseke small
diversity About 900 genera and 13,000 species
diversity link List of Asteraceae genera
subdivision ranks Subfamilies
subdivision
Barnadesioideaebr
Cichorioideaebr
:Tribe Arctotidaebr
:Tribe Cardueaebr
:Tribe Eremothamneaebr
:Tribe Lactuceaebr
:Tribe Liabeaebr
:Tribe Mutisieaebr
:Tribe Tarchonantheaebr
:Tribe Vernonieaebr
Asteriodeaebr
:Tribe Anthemideaebr
:Tribe Astereaebr
:Tribe Calenduleaebr
:Tribe Eupatorieaebr
:Tribe Gnaphalieaebr
:Tribe Helenieaebr
:Tribe Heliantheaebr
:Tribe Inuleaebr
:Tribe Plucheaebr
:Tribe Senecioneaebr
'''See also List of Asteraceae genera'''
The family '''Asteraceae''' or, alternatively, family '''Compositae''', known as the '''aster''', '''daisy''' or '''sunflower family''', is a taxon of dicotyledonous flowering plants. The family name is derived from the genus ''Aster'' and refers to the star shaped flower head of its members, typified well by the daisy. The Asteraceae is the second largest family in the Division Magnoliophyta, with some 1,100 genera and over 20,000 recognized species. Only the orchid family (Orchidaceae) is larger, with about 25,000 described species.
Plants belonging to the Asteraceae must share ALL the following characteristics (Judd et al., 1999). None of these traits, taken separately, can be considered synapomorphic.
Inflorescence: a capitulum or flower head
Syngenesious anthers, i.e. with the stamens fused together at their edges by the anthers, forming a tube
Ovary with basal arrangement of the ovules
Ovules one per ovary
Pappus (a tuft of hairs on a fruit)
The fruit is an achene
Sesquiterpenes present in the essential oils, but iridoids lacking.
'') showing the individual flowers
The most common characteristic of all these plants, is that what in common parlance might be called a "flower", is an inflorescence or '''flower head''' a densely packed cluster of many small, individual flowers, usually called '''florets''' (meaning "small flowers").
Plants in the family Asteraceae typically have one or both of two kinds of ''florets''. The outer perimeter of a flower head like that of a sunflower is composed of florets possessing a long strap like petal, termed a '''ligule''' these are the '''ray florets'''. The inner portion of the flower head (or ''disc'') is composed of small flowers with tubular corollas these are the '''disc florets'''. The composition of asteraceous inflorescences varies from all ray flowers (like dandelions, genus ''Taraxacum'') to all disc flowers (like pineapple weeds).
The composite nature of the inflorescences of these plants led early taxonomists to call this family the Compositae. Although the rules governing naming conventions for plant families state that the name should come from the type genus, in this case ''Aster'' and thus Asteraceae. However, the long prevailing name Compositae is also authorized as an alternative family name (ICBN Art. 18.6).
The numerous genera are divided into about 13 tribes. Only one of these, Lactuceae, is considered distinct enough to be a subfamily (subfamily Cichorioideae) the remainer, which are mostly overlapping, are put in the subfamily Asteroideae (Wagner, Herbst, and Sohmer, 1990).
Uses
Commercially important plants in the Asteraceae include the food crops lettuce, chicory, globe artichoke, sunflower, and Jerusalem artichoke. Guayule is a source of hypoallergenic latex.
Many members of Asteracae are copious nectar producers and are useful for evaluating pollinator populations during their bloom. ''Centaurea'' (knapweed), ''Helianthus annuus'' (domestic sunflower), and some species of ''Solidago'' (goldenrod) are major "honey plants" for beekeepers. ''Solidago'' produces relatively high protein pollen, which helps honeybees overwinter.
Many members of the family are grown as ornamental plants for their flowers, e.g., chrysanthemums and some are important ornamental crops for the cut flower industry. Some Asteraceae are economically important in the sense that they are considered noxious weeds, e.g., dandelions.
br clear all
br clear all
References
International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN, St. Louis Code). 1999. (Published as ''Regnum Vegetabile 138''. Koeltz Scientific Books, K nigstein. ISBN 3904144227)
Walters, Dirk R. and David J. Keil (1996). ''Vascular plant taxonomy''. 4th ed. Kendall Hunt Publishing Company. Dubuque, Iowa.
Wagner,W.L., D.R. Herbst, and S.H. Sohmer. 1990. ''Manual of the Flowering Plants of Hawaii'', Vol. I. University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu. 988 pp.
Judd, W.S., C.S. Campbell, E.A. Kellogg, and P.F. Stevens. 1999. Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Category:Plant families
! en:Asteraceae
cs:Hv zdnicovit
da:Kurvblomst familien
de:Korbbl tengew chse
es:Asteraceae
eo:Asteracoj
fr:Asteraceae
it:Asteraceae
la:Asteraceae
lt:Astriniai augalai
mi:Asteraceae
nl:Composietenfamilie
ja:
no:Kurvplantefamilien
nn:Korgplantefamilien
pl:Astrowate
pt:Asteraceae
sv:Korgblommiga v xter
vi:H C c
zh:
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Carrot family
image QALace2675.JPG
image width 240px
image caption Flower of Wild Carrot (''Daucus carota'')
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Magnoliopsida
ordo Apiales
familia '''Apiaceae''' or '''Umbelliferae'''
subdivision ranks Genera
subdivision
See textbr
Ref:
The '''Apiaceae''' or '''Umbelliferae''' (both names are allowed by the ICBN) are a family of usually aromatic plants with hollow stems, including parsley, carrot, and other relatives. It is a large family with about 300 genera and more than 3,000 species. The earlier name Umbelliferae derives from the inflorescence being in the form of a compound "umbel".
The small flowers are radially symmetrical with 5 small sepals, 5 petals and 5 stamens.
The family contains some highly toxic plants, such as hemlock, which was used to execute Socrates and also used to poison arrow tips. It also contains some highly useful plants, such as carrots, parsley, caraway, and fennel. Many plants in this family, such as wild carrot have estrogenic properties, and have been used as folk medicine for birth control. Most notable for this use is the extinct giant fennel, silphium.
Notable members include:
''Anethum graveolens'' Dill
''Anthriscus cerefolium'' Chervil
''Angelica'' spp. Angelica
''Apium graveolens'' Celery
''Carum carvi'' Caraway
''Centella asiatica'' Gotu kola (pennywort)
''Conium maculatum'' Poison hemlock
''Coriandrum sativum'' Coriander
''Cuminum cyminum'' Cumin
''Daucus carota'' Carrot
''Eryngium'' spp. Sea holly
''Foeniculum vulgare'' Fennel
''Myrrhis odorata'' Cicely
''Pastinaca sativa'' Parsnip
''Petroselinum crispum'' Parsley
''Pimpinella anisum'' Anise
''Levisticum officinale'' Lovage
Genera
''Aciphylla''
''Actinotus''
''Aegopodium''
''Aethusa''
''Aletes''
''Ammi''
''Ammoselinum''
''Anethum''
''Angelica''
''Anthriscus''
''Apiastrum''
''Apium''
''Arracacia''
''Astrantia''
''Athamantha''
''Azorella''
''Berula''
''Bifora''
''Bolax''
''Bowlesia''
''Bunium''
''Bupleurum''
''Carum''
''Caucalis''
''Centella''
''Chaerophyllum''
''Ciclospermum''
''Cicuta''
''Cnidium''
''Coelopleurum''
''Conioselinum''
''Conium''
''Conopodium''
''Coriandrum''
''Crithmum''
''Cryptotaenia''
''Cuminum''
''Cyclospermum''
''Cymopterus''
''Cynosciadium''
''Daucosma''
''Daucus'' carrot
''Dorema''
''Erigenia''
''Eryngium''
''Eurytaenia''
''Falcaria''
''Ferula''
''Foeniculum''
''Glehnia''
''Harbouria''
''Heracleum''
''Hydrocotyle'' (is now classified under Araliaceae)
''Laser''
''Laserpitium''
''Levisticum''
''Ligusticum''
''Lilaeopsis''
''Limnosciadium''
''Lomatium''
''Meum''
''Monizia''
''Musineon''
''Myrrhis''
''Neoparrya''
''Oenanthe''
''Oreomyrrhis''
''Oreonana''
''Oreoxis''
''Orogenia''
''Osmorhiza''
''Oxypolis''
''Pastinaca''
''Perideridia''
''Petroselinum''
''Peucedanum''
''Pimpinella''
''Pleurospermum''
''Podistera''
''Polytaenia''
''Prangos''
''Pseudocymopterus''
''Pteryxia''
''Ptilimnium''
''Sanicula''
''Scandix''
''Selinum''
''Seseli''
''Shoshonea''
''Silaum''
''Sison''
''Sium''
''Smyrnium''
''Spermolepis''
''Sphenosciadium''
''Sympholoma''
''Synelcosciadium''
''Taenidia''
''Tauschia''
''Thapsia''
''Thaspium''
''Tilingia''
''Tordylium''
''Torilis''
''Trachymene''
''Trachyspermum''
''Trepocarpus''
''Turgenia''
''Yabea''
''Zizia''
External links
Category:Plant families
cs:Mi kovit
da:Sk rmplante familien
de:Doldenbl tler
es:Apiaceae
eo:Apiacoj
fr:Apiaceae
la:Apiaceae
lt:Salieriniai
hu:Erny svir g ak
nl:Schermbloemenfamilie
ja:
no:Skjermplantefamilien
nn:Skjermplantefamilien
pl:Selerowate
fi:Sarjakukkaiskasvit
sv:Flockblommiga v xter
vi:H Hoa t n
zh:
An '''axon''', or '''nerve fiber''', is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, that conducts electrical impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. Axons are in effect the primary transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. Individual axons are microscopic in diameter typically about one micrometre across but may extend to macroscopic lengths. The longest axons in the human body, for example, are those of the sciatic nerve, which run from the base of the spine to the big toe of each foot. These single cell fibers may extend a meter or even longer.
In vertebrates, the axons of many neurons are sheathed in myelin, which is formed by either of two types of glial cells: Schwann cells ensheathing peripheral neurons and oligodendrocytes insulating those of the central nervous system. Along myelinated nerve fibers, gaps in the sheath known as nodes of Ranvier occur at evenly spaced intervals, enabling an especially rapid mode of electrical impulse propagation called saltation. The demyelination of axons is what causes the multitude of neurological symptoms found in the disease Multiple Sclerosis.
The axons of some neurons branch to form axon collaterals, along which the bifurcated impulse travels simultaneously to signal more than one other cell.
Growth Development
Growing axons move through their environment via the growth cone, which is at the tip of the axon. The growth cone has a broad sheet like extension called lamellipodia which contain protrusions called filopodia. The filopodia are the mechanism by which the entire process adheres to surfaces and explores the surrounding environment. Actin plays a major role in the mobility of this system.
Environments with high levels of cell adhesion molecules or CAM's create an ideal environment for axonal growth. This seems to provide a "sticky" surface for axons to grow along. Examples of CAM's specific to neural systems include N CAM, neuroglial CAM or NgCAM, TAG 1, MAG, and DCC, all of which are part of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Another set of molecules called extracellular matrix adhesion molecules also provide a sticky substrate for axons to grow along. Examples of these molecules include laminin, fibronectin, tenascin, and perlecan. Some of these are surface bound to cells and thus act as short range attractants or repellants. Others are difusible ligands and thus can have long range effects.
Cells called guidepost cells assist in the guidance of neuronal axon growth. These cells are typically other, sometimes immature, neurons.
History
Some of the first intracellular recordings in a nervous system were made in the late 1930's by K. Cole and H. Curtis. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential.
Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963.
See also
Neuron
Dendrite
Synapse
Axon guidance
Electrophysiology
External links
http: www.sfn.org wrensite projects patch clamp index.htm
Category:Neurons
Category:Neurophysiology
da:Akson
de:Axon
es:Ax n
fr:Axone
he: ( )
lt:Aksonas
nl:Axon
pt:Ax nio
ru:
fi:Aksoni
sv:Axon
The '''Aramaic alphabet''' is an abjad alphabet designed for writing the Aramaic language. As with other abjads, the letters all represent consonants a few matres lectionis are consonants that also represent long vowels.
The earliest inscriptions in the Aramaic language use the Phoenician alphabet. In time, the alphabet developed into the form shown below. The use of Aramaic as a lingua franca throughout the Middle East from the 8th century BCE led to the gradual adoption of the Aramaic alphabet for writing Hebrew. Formerly, Hebrew had been written using an alphabet closer in form to that of Phoenician (the Paleo Hebrew alphabet).
The Hebrew and Nabataean alphabets are little changed in style from the Aramaic alphabet. The development of cursive versions of Aramaic led to the creation of the Syriac, Palmyrenean and Mandaic alphabets. These scripts formed the basis of the Arabic, Sogdian, Orkhon and Mongolian alphabets. Controversially, it is claimed that the Aramaic alphabet may be the forebear of the Indic alphabets.
Today, Biblical Aramaic, Jewish Neo Aramaic dialects and the Aramaic language of the Talmud are written in the Hebrew alphabet. Syriac and Christian Neo Aramaic dialects are written in the Syriac alphabet. Mandaic is written in the Mandaic alphabet.
Imperial Aramaic alphabet
Redrawn from ''A Grammar of Biblical Aramaic'', Franz Rosenthal forms are as used in Egypt, 5th century BCE. Names are as in Biblical Aramaic.
border "2" cellpadding "4" cellspacing "0" style "margin: 1em 1em 1em 0 border: 1px aaa solid border collapse: collapse font size: 95 "
!Letter name ta
!Letter form
!Equivalent Hebrew
!Pronunciation
Aleph
image:ialeph.png
style "font size: 33px "
glottal stop ,
Beth
image:ibeth.png
style "font size: 33px "
b, v
Gimel
image:igimel.png
style "font size: 33px "
g, gh
Daleth
image:idaleth.png
style "font size: 33px "
d, dh
Heh
image:ihe.png
style "font size: 33px "
h
Waw
image:iwaw.png
style "font size: 33px "
w ,
Zayin
image:izayin.png
style "font size: 33px "
z
Heth
image:iheth.png
style "font size: 33px "
(voiceless pharyngeal fricative)
Teth
image:iteth.png
style "font size: 33px "
emphatic t
Yodh
image:iyod.png
style "font size: 33px "
y ,
Kaph
image:ikaph.png
style "font size: 33px "
k
Lamed
image:ilamed.png
style "font size: 33px "
l
Mem
image:imem.png
style "font size: 33px "
m
Nun
image:inun.png
style "font size: 33px "
n
Samekh
image:isamekh.png
style "font size: 33px "
s
Ayin
image:iayin.png
style "font size: 33px "
voiced pharyngeal fricative td tr
Pe
image:ipe.png
style "font size: 33px "
p, f
Sade
image:isade.png, image:isade2.png
style "font size: 33px "
emphatic s
Qoph
image:iqoph.png
style "font size: 33px "
q (voiceless uvular plosive)
Resh
image:iresh.png
style "font size: 33px "
r
Sin Shin
image:ishin.png
style "font size: 33px "
usually in some words s (probably originally from a Proto Semitic lateral fricative)
Taw
image:itaw.png
style "font size: 33px "
t, th
See also
Abjad
Alphabet
Aramaic language
Syriac language
Mandaic language
List of writing systems
External links
Category:Abjad writing systems
Category:Aramaic languages
ar: ( )
bg:
cs:Aramejsk p smo
de:Aram ische Schrift
es:Alfabeto arameo
eo:Aramea skribo
fr:Alphabet aram en
gl:Alfabeto arameo
ja:
pl:Alfabet aramejski
pt:Alfabeto aramaico
ru:
fi:Aramean kirjaimisto
'''AWK''' may refer to
AWK programming language
The National Rail code for Adwick railway station, United Kingdom. External links: .
Vannevar Bush's essay '''''As We May Think''''', first published in ''The Atlantic Monthly'' in July 1945, argued that as humans turned from war, scientific efforts should shift from increasing physical abilities to making all previous collected human knowledge more accessible.
The article was a reworked and expanded version of his 1939 ''Mechanization and the Record''. The system, which he called memex, was described as based on what was thought, at the time, to be the wave of the future: Ultra high resolution microfilm reels, coupled to multiple screen viewers and cameras, by electromechanical controls. The ''Atlantic Monthly'' article was followed, in November 1945, by a Life magazine article which showed illustrations of the proposed memex desk and automatic typewriter.
''As We May Think'' predicted many kinds of technology invented after its publication, including hypertext, personal computers, the Internet, the World Wide Web, speech recognition, and online encyclopedias such as Wikipedia: "Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified."
External links
Online versions
(accessible without subscription and with permission of ''Atlantic Monthly'')
Category:Essays
da:As We May Think
fr:As We May Think
pl:As We May Think
pt:As We May Think
"'''American shot'''" is a translation of a phrase from French film criticism, "''plan Americain''" and refers to a medium long ("knee") film shot of a group of characters, who are arranged so that all are visible to the camera. The usual arrangement is for the actors to stand in an irregular line from one side of the screen to the other, with the actors at the end coming forward a little and standing more in profile than the others. The purpose of the composition is to allow complex dialogue scenes to be played out without changes in camera position. In some literature, this is simply referred to as a 3 4 shot.
The French critics thought it was characteristic of American films of the 1930s or 1940s however, it was mostly characteristic of ''cheaper'' American movies, such as Charlie Chan mysteries where people collected in front of a fireplace or at the foot of the stairs in order to explain what happened a few minutes ago.
Category:Film techniques
de:Einstellungsgr e
fr:Plan am ricain
DiseaseDisorder infobox
Name Acute disseminated encephalitis
ICD10 G04.0
ICD9
'''Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis''' ('''ADEM''') is an immune mediated disease of brain. It usually occurs following a viral infection or vaccination, but it may also appear spontaneously.
There are multiple inflammatory cell deposits in the brain, particularly in the section
called white matter. Although it occurs in all ages, most reported cases are in children and adolescents.
It has an abrupt onset and a monophasic course. Symptoms usually begins 1 3 weeks after infection or vaccination. Major symptoms are fever, headache, drowsiness, seizures and coma. Although initially the symptoms are usually mild, later in the course of the disease patients may even die, if they are not treated properly. Some patients recover completely, while others have permanent neurological impairments.
The first treatment is usually steroids and intensive care is often required.
External links
Category:Autoimmune diseases
Category:Neurological disorders
de:Akute disseminierte Enzephalomyelitis
REDIRECT Adrenoleukodystrophy
'''Ataxia''' (from Greek ''ataxi '', meaning failure to put in order) is unsteady and clumsy motion of the limbs or trunk due to a failure of the gross coordination of muscle movements.
Ataxia often occurs when parts of the nervous system that control movement are damaged. People with ataxia experience a failure of muscle control in their arms and legs, resulting in a lack of balance and coordination or a disturbance of gait. While the term ataxia is primarily used to describe this set of symptoms, it is sometimes also used to refer to a family of disorders. It is not, however, a specific diagnosis.
Most disorders that result in ataxia cause cells in the part of the brain called the cerebellum to degenerate, or atrophy. Sometimes the spine is also affected. The phrases ''cerebellar degeneration'' and ''spinocerebellar degeneration'' are used to describe changes that have taken place in a person s nervous system neither term constitutes a specific diagnosis. Cerebellar and spinocerebellar degeneration have many different causes. The age of onset of the resulting ataxia varies depending on the underlying cause of the degeneration.
Many ataxias are hereditary and are classified by chromosomal location and pattern of inheritance: autosomal dominant, in which the affected person inherits a normal gene from one parent and a faulty gene from the other parent and autosomal recessive, in which both parents pass on a copy of the faulty gene. Among the more common inherited ataxias are Friedreich's ataxia and Machado Joseph disease. Sporadic ataxias can also occur in families with no prior history.
Ataxia can also be acquired. Conditions that can cause acquired ataxia include stroke, multiple sclerosis, tumors, lesions of the central nervous system or spinal cord, alcoholism, peripheral neuropathy, metabolic disorders, and vitamin deficiencies.
Dysdiadochokinesia is a sign of cerebellar ataxia.
University of Minnesota researchers suggested in 2006 that Abraham Lincoln may have suffered from spinocerebellar ataxia type 5, thus accounting for his clumsy gait.
See also
Spinocerebellar ataxia
Sensory ataxia
Gait abnormality
External links
Category:Neurological disorders
Category:Symptoms
de:Ataxie
es:Ataxia
fr:Ataxie
it:Atassia
hu:Ataxia
nl:Ataxie
pl:Ataksja
fi:Ataksia
'''Abdul Alhazred''', or the '''Mad Arab''', is a fictional character created by the horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. The term "Mad Arab" in reference to Alhazred is always capitalised and used in the manner of an official title such as another person would be called "Prince" or "Sir" and the term can actually be used in lieu of Alhazred's name as a synonym.
''Abdul Alhazred'' is not a real Arabic name, and seems to contain the Arabic definite article morpheme twice in a row (rather anomalous in terms of Arabic grammar). The more proper Arabic form might be ''Abd el Hazred'' or simply ''Abdul Hazred'' (with a single definite article), although these are still anomalous, as ''Hazred'' is not one of the 99 Names of God. In Arabic translations, his name has appeared as ''Abdullah Al a red'' ( ). While this Arabic alphabet spelling of ''Alhazred'' has no real meaning in the Arabic language, it is reminiscent of the verb root meaning "to forbid."
According to Lovecraft's "History of the Necronomicon" (written 1927, first published 1938), Alhazred was:
: A mad poet of Sana , in Yemen, who is said to have flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D. He visited the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis and spent ten years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia the Roba el Khaliyeh or "Empty Space" of the ancients and "Dahna" or "Crimson" desert of the modern Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by protective evil spirits and monsters of death. Of this desert many strange and unbelievable marvels are told by those who pretend to have penetrated it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in Damascus.
In 730, while still living in Damascus, Alhazred supposedly authored in Arabic a book of ultimate evil, ''al Azif'', which would later become known as the ''Necronomicon''.
Those who have any dealings with the Necronomicon usually come to an unpleasant end, and Alhazred was no exception. Again according to Lovecraft:
:Of his final death or disappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told. He is said by Ibn Khallikan (13th century biographer) to have been seized by an invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large number of fright frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He claimed to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found beneath the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and secrets of a race older than mankind. He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping unknown entities whom he called Yog Sothoth and Cthulhu.
August Derleth later made alterations to the biography of Alhazared. One change was redating Alhazared's death to 731. Derleth further wrote on the final fate of Alhazred in his story "The Keeper of the Key", first published in May, 1951. In this story Dr. Laban Shrewsbury (a recurring Derleth character) and his assistant at the time, Naylan Colum, discovered Alhazred's burial site. More specifically they were heading a caravan from Salalah, Oman, and crossed the border into Yemen. There they found the unexplored desert area the Necronomicon names as "Roba el Ehaliyeh" or "Roba el Khaliyeh" perhaps a form of "Rabia al Awliya" which, again, is not proper Arabic, but could be an allusion to the Sufi Saint Rabia (pure conjecture). More likely it refers the Empty Quarter or "Rub al Khali". At the center of the area they discovered the Nameless City, a domain of Hastur. Shrewsbury, as an old agent of Hastur and devoted enemy of his half brother Cthulhu, crossed its gates in search of Alhazred's burial site. He indeed found the gate of Alhazred's burial chamber and learned of his fate. Alhazred was kidnapped in Damascus and brought to the Nameless City, where he had earlier studied and learned some of Necronomicon's secrets. As punishment for his betrayal of their secrets, Alhazred was tortured. Then they blinded him and severed his tongue, and finally executed him. The entrance to the chamber warned against disturbing him. But Shrewbury proceeded in entering the chamber and opening the sarcophagus. Though only rugs, bones and dust remained of Alhazred, the sarcophagus also contained an incomplete personal copy of the Necronomicon, written in the Arabic alphabet. Then Shrewsbury used Necromancy to recall Alhazred's spirit and ordered it to draw a map of the world as he knew it. After obtaining the map, which revealed the location of R'lyeh and other secret places, Shrewsbury finally let Alhazred return to his eternal rest.
Pop culture
Roberta Williams used the name "Abdul Alhazred" as the name of the villain in King's Quest 6.
Marvel comics has also used the name Abdul Alhazred as a supervillian working for Apocalypse.
See also
Cthulhu mythos biographies
Category:Cthulhu mythos
Alhazred, Abdul
Alhazred, Abdul
es:Abdul Alhazred
fr:Abdul al Hazred
ja:
pl:Abdul Alhazred
sv:Abdul Alhazred
'''Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace''' (December 10, 1815 November 27, 1852) is mainly known for having written a description of
Charles Babbage's early mechanical general purpose computer, the analytical engine.
Life
Ada was the only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron and his wife, Annabella Milbanke. Ada was named after Byron's half sister, Augusta Leigh, by whom he was rumoured to have fathered a child. It was Augusta who encouraged Byron to marry to avoid scandal, and he reluctantly chose Annabella. On January 16, 1816, Annabella left Byron, taking 1 month old Ada with her. On April 21, Byron signed the Deed of Separation and left England for good a few days later. He was never allowed to see either again.
Ada lived with her mother, as is apparent in her father's correspondence concerning her. Lady Byron was also highly interested in mathematics (Lord Byron once called her "the queen of parallelograms"), which dominated her life, even after marriage. Her obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Lord Byron was one of the reasons why Annabella taught Ada mathematics at an early age. Ada was privately schooled in mathematics and science, one of her tutors being Augustus De Morgan. An active member of London society, she was a member of the Bluestockings in her youth.
In 1835 she married William King, 8th Baron King, later 1st Earl of Lovelace. They had three children Byron born 12 May 1836, Annabella (Lady Anne Blunt) born 22 September 1837 and Ralph Gordon born 2 July 1839. The family lived at Ockham Park, at Ockham, Surrey. Her full name and title for most of her married life was '''The Right Honourable Augusta Ada, Countess of Lovelace'''. She is widely known in modern times simply as '''Ada Lovelace'''.
She knew Mary Somerville, noted researcher and scientific author of the 19th century, who introduced her in turn to Charles Babbage on June 5, 1833. Other acquaintances were Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Charles Dickens and Michael Faraday.
During a nine month period in 1842 1843, Ada translated for Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's memoir on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended a set of Notes which specified in complete detail a method for calculating Bernoulli numbers with the Engine, recognized by historians as the world's first computer program. Biographers note, however, that the programs were written by Babbage himself, and Lovelace simply found a mistake in the program for calculating Bernoulli numbers and sent it back for amendment. The evidence and correspondence between Lovelace and Babbage indicate that he wrote all of the programs in the notes appended to the Menebrea translation. Her prose acknowledged some possibilities of the machine which Babbage never published, such as speculating that "the Engine might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent."
Ada Lovelace died at 36 after being bled to death by her physicians, who were trying to treat her uterine cancer. Thus, she died, ironically, not only at the same age as her father did, but even of the same cause the mistaken custom of bloodletting. She left two sons and a daughter, Lady Anne Blunt, famous in her own right as a traveller in the Middle East and a breeder of Arabian horses.
At her own request, Lovelace was buried next to the father she never knew at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottingham.
Controversy over attribution
Biographers have noted that Lovelace struggled with mathematics, and there is some debate as to whether Lovelace understood deeply the concepts behind programming Babbage's engine, or was more of a figurehead used by Babbage for public relations purposes.
As an early woman in computing, Lovelace occupies a politically sensitive space in the canon of historical figures in computer science, and therefore the extent of her contribution versus Babbage's remains difficult to assess based on current sources.
Trivia
On December 10, 1980, (Ada's birthday), the U.S. Defense Department approved the reference manual for their new computer programming language, called "Ada".
The U.S. Department of Defense Military Standard for Ada (MIL STD 1815) was assigned a number to commemorate the year of her birth.
On the math mystery cartoon, ''Cyberchase'', she appears as the animated character Lady Ada Lovelace, voiced by ''Saturday Night Live'' comedian Jane Curtin. The episode is "Hugs and Witches" ( 201) which premiered February 14, 2002 on PBS Kids GO!.
She is one of the main characters in the alternate history novel ''The Difference Engine'' by Bruce Sterling and William Gibson, which posits a world in which Babbage's machines were mass produced and the computer age started a century early.
''Lord Byron's Novel'' by John Crowley is a pastiche of a novel supposedly by Byron (in real life he did begin writing one, but is not known to have completed it), discovered after his death by his daughter, edited and with commentary by her.
Her image can be seen on the Microsoft product authenticity hologram stickers.
See also
Ada Byron's notes on the analytical engine
Women in computing
Ada programming language
External links
(archive link, was dead)
, and
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
Lovelace, Ada
cs:Augusta Ada King
da:Ada Lovelace
de:Ada Lovelace
es:Ada Lovelace
fa:
fr:Ada Lovelace
gl:Ada Augusta Lovelace
hr:Ada Lovelace
it:Ada Lovelace
he:
nl:Ada Lovelace
ja:
no:Ada Byron Lovelace
pl:Ada Lovelace
pt:Ada Lovelace
ru: ,
fi:Ada Lovelace
sv:Ada Lovelace
th:
vi:Ada Lovelace
REDIRECT Ambient calculus
In computer science, the '''ambient calculus''' is a process calculus devised by Luca Cardelli
and Andrew D. Gordon in 1998, and used to describe and theorise about concurrent systems that include ''mobility''. Here ''mobility'' means both computation carried out on mobile devices (''i.e.'' networks that have a dynamic topology), and mobile computation (''i.e.'' executable code that is able to move around the network). The ambient calculus provides a unified framework for modeling both kinds of mobility . It is used to model interactions in such concurrent systems as the Internet.
Since its inception, the ambient calculus has grown into a family of closely related .
Informal description
Ambients
The fundamental primitive of the ambient calculus is the ''ambient''. An ambient is informally defined as a ''bounded'' place in which computation can occur. The notion of boundaries is considered key to representing mobility, since a boundary defines a contained computational agent that can be moved in its entirety . Examples of ambients include:
a web page (bounded by a file)
a virtual address space (bounded by an addressing range)
a Unix file system (bounded within a physical volume)
a single data object (bounded by self )
a laptop (bounded by its case and data ports)
The key properties of ambients within the Ambient calculus are:
Ambients have names, which are used to control access to the ambient
Ambients can be nested inside other ambients (representing, for example, administrative domains)
Ambients can be moved as a whole
Operations
Computation is represented as the crossing of boundaries, ''i.e.'' the movement of ambients. There are three basic operations (or capabilities) on ambients :
mathin m.P math instructs the surrounding ambient to enter some sibling ambient mathm math, and then proceed as mathP math
mathout m.P math instructs the surrounding ambient to exit its parent ambient mathm math
mathopen m.P math instructs the surrounding ambient to dissolve the boundary of an ambient mathm math located at the same level
The Ambient calculus provides a reduction semantics that formally defines what the results of these operations are.
Communication ''within'' (''i.e.'' local to) an ambient is anonymous and asynchronous. Output actions release names or capabilities into the surrounding ambient. Input actions capture a value from the ambient, and bind it to a variable. ''Non local'' I O can be represented in terms of these local communications actions by a variety of means. One approach is to use mobile messenger agents that carry a message from one ambient to another (using the capabilities described above). Another approach is to emulate channel based communications by modeling a channel in terms of ambients and operations on those ambients . The three basic ambient primitives, namely '''in''', '''out''', and '''open''' are expressive enough to simulate name passing channels in the calculus.
Criticisms
Some people believe that the synchronous nature of the three ambient actions ('''in''', '''out''', and '''open''') may make it difficult to adopt the ambient calculus as the programming language core for mobile and distributed computing. A counter argument to this criticism is that the ambient calculus is not intended to act as a language core, but rather to provide general capabilities for formally modelling and analyzing complex concurrent systems that may consist of components written in a variety of languages.
See also
process calculi
programming language
theoretical computer science
lambda calculus
type theory
External links
by Luca Cardelli
References
Cardelli, L. and Gordon, A. D. 1998: ''Mobile Ambients'', Proceedings of the First international Conference on Foundations of Software Science and Computation Structure (March 28 April 04, 1998). M. Nivat, Ed. Lecture Notes In Computer Science, vol. 1378. Springer Verlag, London, 140 155.
Category:Process calculi
'''August William Derleth''' (February 24 1909 July 4 1971) was an American writer and anthologist. The son of William Julius Derleth and his wife Rose Louise Volk, he resided in Sauk City, Wisconsin.
At the age of 16, he sold his first story to ''Weird Tales'' magazine. Derleth wrote all throughout his four years at the University of Wisconsin Madison and received a B.A. in 1930. During this time he served briefly as editor of ''Mystic Magazine''.
In the mid 1930s he organised a Ranger's Club for young people, served as clerk and president of the local Board of Education, served as a parole officer, organised a local Mens Club and a parent teacher association. He also lectured in American Regional Literature at the University of Wisconsin.
Derleth was a contemporary and friend of H. P. Lovecraft when Lovecraft wrote about "le Comte d'Erlette" in his fiction it was in homage to Derleth. After Lovecraft's death he took a number of that author's unfinished stories and rewrote or finished them for publication in ''Weird Tales'' and later in book form. In the process, he invented the term Cthulhu Mythos to describe the invented mythology that seemed to lie behind much of Lovecraft's fiction. Derleth codified the Mythos to bring it more in line with his own Christian conception of the battle between good and evil and, as other authors had done before him, added new gods and creatures to the stories.
When Lovecraft died in 1937, Derleth and Donald Wandrei put together a collection of that author's stories and tried to get them published. With existing publishers showing little interest, they founded Arkham House in 1939 to do it themselves. The name of the company comes from Lovecraft's fictional town of Arkham, Massachusetts, which featured in many of his stories.
In 1939 Arkham House published ''The Outsider and Others'', a huge collection that contained most of Lovecraft's short stories then known to exist. Derleth and Wandrei soon decided to expand Arkham House and began a regular publishing schedule after its second book, ''Someone in the Dark'' in 1941, a collection of some of Derleth's own horror stories.
In 1941 he became literary editor of ''The Capital Times'' newspaper in Madison, a post he held until his resignation in 1960.
Derleth was married April 6 1953 to Sandra Evelyn Winters, and they were divorced six years later in 1959. He retained custody of their two children, April Rose and Walden William. In 1960, Derleth began editing and publishing a magazine called ''Hawk and Whippoorwill'', dedicated to poems of man and nature.
He died on July 4 1971 and is buried in St. Aloysius Cemetery, Sauk City, Wisconsin.
Derleth wrote more than 150 short stories and more than 100 books during his lifetime. Included among that number were several novels about a British detective named Solar Pons, who was quite similar in many respects to Sherlock Holmes. Derleth, however, lacked the knowledge to make the details of those stories authentic, as he had never been to England. He also wrote under the pseudonyms Stephen Grendon, Kenyon Holmes and Tally Mason.
See also
Derleth Bibliography
External links
Listing of all mythos novels, anthologies, collections, comic books, and more.
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
Derleth, August
de:August Derleth
fr:August Derleth
ja:
pl:August Derleth
sv:August Derleth
:''This article is about the Alps in Europe. For other mountain ranges see Alps (disambiguation).''
valley near the Mer de Glace.
The '''Alps''' (Alpi in Italian) is the name for one of the great mountain range systems of Europe, stretching from Austria, Italy and Slovenia in the east, through Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Germany to France in the west. The word "Alps" was taken via French from Latin ''Alpes'' (meaning "the Alps"), which may be influenced by the Latin words ''albus'' (white) or ''altus'' (high), or a Celtic word.
The highest mountain in the Alps is Mont Blanc at 4810m on the French Italian border. All the main peaks of the Alps can be found in the list of mountains of the Alps and list of Alpine peaks by prominence.
Geography
:''Main article: Geography of the Alps''
Subdivision
The Alps are generally divided into Western Alps and Eastern Alps. The division is along the line between Lake Constance and Lake Como, following the Rhine. The Western Alps are located in Italy, France and Switzerland, the Eastern Alps in Austria, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Slovenia and Switzerland. The highest peak of the Western Alps is Mont Blanc, 4810 m. The highest peak in the Eastern Alps is Piz Bernina, 4052 meters.
The Eastern Alps are commonly subdivided according to the different geological composition of the more central parts of the Alps and the groups at its northern and southern fringes: Northern Limestone Alps, Central Eastern Alps and Southern Limestone Alps. The border between the Central Eastern Alps and the Southern Limestone Alps is the Periadriatic Seam. The Northern Limestone Alps are separated from the Central Eastern Alps by the Grauwacken Zone.
The Western Alps are commonly subdivided into the following:
Ligurian Alps
Maritime Alps
Cottian Alps
Dauphin Alps
Graian Alps
Pennine Alps
Bernese Alps
Lepontine Alps
Glarus Alps
North Eastern Swiss Alps
Series of lower mountain ranges run parallel to the main chains of the Alps, including the French Prealps.
Main chains
:''Main article: Main chain of the Alps''
The "main chain of the Alps" follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, passing over many of the highest and most famous peaks in the Alps. From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards, before turning to the north west and then, near the Colle della Maddalena, to the north. Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain heads approximately east north east, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.
Principal passes
:''Main article: Principal passes of the Alps''
The Alps do not form an impassable barrier they have been traversed for war and commerce, and later by pilgrims, students and tourists. Crossing places by road, train or foot are called passes, these are depressions in the mountains to which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre mountainous zones.
Climate
:''Main article: Climate of the Alps''
The ''climate of the Alps'' is the climate, or average weather conditions over a long time, of the central Alpine region of Europe. As we rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere, the temperature decreases. The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of heat, often accompanied by the precipitation of moisture in the form of snow or rain.
Geology
:''Main article: Geology of the Alps''
The Alps arose as a result of the pressure exerted on sediments of the Tethys Ocean basin as its Mesozoic and early Cenozoic strata were pushed against the stable Eurasian landmass by the northward moving African landmass. Most of this occurred during the Oligocene and Miocene epochs. The pressure formed great recumbent folds, or ''nappes'', that rose out of what had become the Tethys Sea and pushed northward, often breaking and sliding one over the other to form gigantic thrust faults. Crystalline rocks, which are exposed in the higher central regions, are the rocks forming Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and high peaks in the Pennine Alps and Hohe Tauern.
The landscape seen today is mostly formed by glaciation during the past two million years. At least five ice ages have done much to remodel the region, scooping out the lakes and rounding off the limestone hills along the northern border. Glaciers have been retreating during the past 10,000 years, leaving large granite boulders scattered in the forests in the region. As the last ice age ended, it is believed that the climate changed so rapidly that the glaciers retreated back into the mountains in a span of about 200 to 300 years.
Political history
:''Main article: Political history and modern state of the inhabitants of the Alps''
Little is known of the early dwellers in the Alps, save from the scanty accounts preserved by Roman and Greek historians and geographers. A few details have come down to us of the conquest of many of the Alpine tribes by Augustus.
The successive emigration and occupation of the Alpine region by various Teutonic tribes from the 5th to the 6th centuries are known only in outline, because to them, as to the Frankish kings and emperors, the Alps offered a route from one place to another rather than a permanent residence.
It is not until the final breakup of the Carolingian Empire in the 10th and 11th centuries that it becomes possible to trace out the local history of the Alps.
Exploration
:''Main article: Exploration of the High Alps''
The higher regions of the Alps were long left to the exclusive attention of the men of the adjoining valleys, even when Alpine travellers (as distinguished from Alpine climbers) began to visit these valleys. The two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were H.B. de Saussure (1740 1799) in the Pennine Alps, and the Benedictine monk of Disentis, Placidus a Spescha (1752 1833), most of whose ascents were made before 1806, in the valleys at the sources of the Rhine.
Flora
A natural vegetation limit with altitude is given by the presence of the chief deciduous trees oak, beech, ash and sycamore maple. These do not reach exactly to the same elevation, nor are they often found growing together but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the wild herbaceous vegetation. This limit usually lies about 1200 m above the sea on the north side of the Alps, but on the southern slopes it often rises to 1500 m, sometimes even to 1700 m.
It must not be supposed that this region is always marked by the presence of the characteristic trees. The interference of man has in many districts almost removed them, and, excepting the beech forests of the Austrian Alps, a considerable wood of deciduous trees is rare. In many districts where such woods once existed, their place has been occupied by the Scots pine and Norway spruce, which suffer less from the ravages of goats, the worst enemies of tree vegetation. The mean annual temperature of this region differs little from that of the British Islands but the climate conditions are widely different. Here snow usually lies for several months, till it gives place to a spring and summer considerably warmer than the average of British seasons.
'''Typical plants found in the Alps:'''
gallery
Image:Leontopodium alpinum1.jpg Edelweissbr (''Leontopodium alpinum'')
Image:Gentiana acaulis.jpg stemless gentianbr (''Gentiana acaulis'')
Image:RostblaettrigeAlpenrose.jpg rusty leaved Alpenrosebr (''Rhododendron ferrugineum'')
Image:Chamorchis alpina 230705b.jpg Alpine dwarf orchidbr (''Chamorchis alpina'')
Image:Ranunculus glacialis.jpg glacier buttercupbr (''Ranunculus glacialis'')
Image:Kosodrzewina (Sosna g rska) Pinus mugo mugo.jpg mountain pinebr (''Pinus mugo'')
Image:Pulsatilla alpina schneebergensis.jpg Alpine pasque flowerbr (''Pulsatilla alpina'')
Image:Androsace alpina02.jpg Alpine rock jasmine (''Androsace alpina'')
gallery
Fauna
Species common to the Alps. These are most numerously found in the 15 of the Alps protected in parks and reserves.
gallery
Image:Plochacz 3001xx.jpg centerAlpine Accentor center
Image:Chamois Kleinwalsertal 1997.jpg centerChamois center
Image:Alpenkauw2.jpg centerAlpine Chough center
Image:Goldie.JPG centerGolden Eagle center
Image:Alpine ibex.jpg centerIbex center
Image:Corvus monedula2.jpg centerJackdaw center
Image:Marmota marmota Alpes2.jpg centerMarmot center
Image:Arctic Hare.jpg centerMountain Hare center
Image:Ptarmigan9.jpg centerPtarmigan center
Image:Elk4.jpg centerRed Deer center
Image:Aegolius funereus 001.jpg centerTengmalm's Owl center
gallery
See also
Paganism in the Eastern Alps
Alpinism
External links
, established in 1991 by the Alpine Convention
, taken on August 31, 2005 by MODIS aboard Terra
, a satellite photo taken on May 3, 1993 by Meteosat 4, with analysis
The live webcam locate in the swiss alps. More than 50'000 images since summer 2003.
Category:Mountains of Europe
Category:Mountains of Austria
Category:Mountains of France
Category:Mountains of Germany
Category:Mountains of Switzerland
Category:Mountains of Slovenia
References
af:Alpe
als:Alpen
ar:
bg:
ca:Alps
cs:Alpy
da:Alperne
de:Alpen
et:Alpid
el:
es:Alpes
eo:Alpoj
eu:Alpeak
fr:Alpes
ga:Sliabh Alpa
ko:
hr:Alpe
is:Alpafj ll
it:Alpi
he:
la:Alpes
lt:Alp s
nl:Alpen
ja:
no:Alpene
nn:Alpane
pl:Alpy
pt:Alpes
ro:Alpi
ru:
sk:Alpy
sl:Alpe
sr:
fi:Alpit
sv:Alperna
tr:Alpler
uk:
zh:
'''Albert Camus''' (pronounced Kam oo, IPA: ka.m ) (November 7, 1913 January 4, 1960) was a French author and philosopher and one of the principal luminaries (with Jean Paul Sartre) of absurdism. Camus was the second youngest ever recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature (after Rudyard Kipling) when he received the award in 1957. He is also the shortest lived of any literature laureate to date, having died in a car crash three years after receiving the award.
Early years
Albert Camus was born in Mondovi, Algeria to a French Algerian (pied noir) settler family. His mother was of Spanish extraction. His father, Lucien, died in the Battle of the Marne in 1914 during the First World War, while serving as a member of the Zouave infantry regiment. Camus lived in poor conditions during his childhood in the Belcourt section of Algiers.
In 1923, Camus was accepted into the lyc e and eventually to the University of Algiers. However, he contracted tuberculosis in 1930, which put an end to his football activities (he had been a goalkeeper for the university team) and forced him to make his studies a part time pursuit. He took odd jobs including private tutor, car parts clerk, and work for the Meteorological Institute. He completed his ''licence de philosophie'' (BA) in 1935 in May of 1936, he successfully presented his thesis on Plotinus, ''N o Platonisme et Pens e Chr tienne'' for his ''dipl me d' tudes sup rieures'' (roughly equivalent to an M.A. by thesis).
Camus joined the French Communist Party in 1934, apparently for concern over the political situation in Spain (which eventually resulted in the Spanish Civil War) rather than support for Marxist Leninist doctrine. In 1936, the independence minded Algerian Communist Party (PCA) was founded. Camus joined the activities of Le Parti du Peuple Alg rien, which got him into trouble with his communist party comrades. As a result, he was denounced as "Trotskyite", which did not endear him to Stalinist communism.
In 1934, he married Simone Hie, a morphine addict, but the marriage ended due to Simone's infidelity. In 1935, he founded ''Th tre du Travail'' "Worker's Theatre" (renamed ''Th tre de l'Equipe'' ("Team's Theatre") in 1937), which survived until 1939. From 1937 to 1939, he wrote for a socialist paper, ''Alger Republicain'', and his work included an account of the peasants who lived in Kabylie in poor conditions, which apparently cost him his job. From 1939 to 1940, he briefly wrote for a similar paper, ''Soir Republicain''. He was rejected from the French army because of his tuberculosis.
In 1940, Camus married Francine Faure, a pianist and mathematician. Francine gave birth to twins Catherine and Jean Camus on September 5th, 1945. Also in this year, Camus began to work for ''Paris Soir'' magazine. In the first stage of World War II, the so called Phony War stage, Camus was a pacifist. However, he was in Paris to witness how the Wehrmacht took over. On December 15, 1941, Camus witnessed the execution of Gabriel Peri, an event which Camus later said crystallized his revolt against the Germans. Afterwards he moved to Bordeaux alongside the rest of the staff of ''Paris Soir''. In this year he finished his first books, ''The Stranger'' and ''The Myth of Sisyphus''. He returned briefly to Oran, Algeria in 1942.
Literary career
During the war Camus joined the French Resistance cell ''Combat'', which published an underground newspaper of the same name. This group worked against the Nazis, and in it Camus assumed the moniker "Beauchard". Camus became the paper's editor in 1943, and when the Allies liberated Paris Camus reported on the last of the fighting. He eventually resigned from ''Combat'' in 1947, when it became a commercial paper. It was here that he became acquainted with Jean Paul Sartre.
After the war, Camus became one member of Sartre's entourage and frequented ''Caf de Flore'' on the Boulevard St. Germain in Paris. Camus also toured the United States to lecture about French existentialism. Although he leaned left politically, his strong criticisms of communist doctrine did not win him any friends in the communist parties and eventually also alienated Sartre.
In 1949 his tuberculosis returned and he lived in seclusion for two years. In 1951 he published ''The Rebel'', a philosophical analysis of rebellion and revolution which made clear his rejection of communism. The book upset many of his colleagues and contemporaries in France and led to the final split with Sartre. The dour reception depressed him and he began instead to translate plays.
Camus's most significant contribution to philosophy was his idea of the absurd, the result of our desire for clarity and meaning within a world and condition that offers neither, which he explained in ''The Myth of Sisyphus'' and incorporated into many of his other works, such as ''The Plague''. Some would argue that Camus is better described not as an existentialist (a label he would have rejected) but as an absurdist.
In the 1950s Camus devoted his efforts to human rights. In 1952 he resigned from his work for UNESCO when the UN accepted Spain as a member under the leadership of General Franco. In 1953 he was one of the few leftists who criticized Soviet methods to crush a worker's strike in East Berlin. In 1956 he protested similar methods in Hungary.
He maintained his pacifism and resistance to capital punishment everywhere in the world. One of his most significant contributions was an essay collaboration with Koestler, the writer, intellectual, and founder of the League Against Capital Punishment.
When the Algerian War of Independence began in 1954 it presented a moral dilemma for Camus. He identified with pied noirs, and defended the French government on the grounds that revolt of its North African colony was really an integral part of the 'new Arab imperialism' led by Egypt and an 'anti Western' offensive orchestrated by Russia to 'encircle Europe' and 'isolate the United States' (Actuelles III: Chroniques Algeriennes, 1939 1958). Although favouring greater Algerian autonomy or even federation, though not full scale independence, he believed that the pied noirs and Arabs could co exist. During the war he advocated civil truce that would spare the civilians, which was rejected by both sides who regarded it as foolish. Behind the scenes, he began to work clandestinely for imprisoned Algerians who faced the death penalty.
From 1955 to 1956 Camus wrote for L'Express. In 1957 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature, officially not for his novel ''The Fall'', published the previous year, but for his writings against capital punishment in the essay "R flexions Sur la Guillotine". When he spoke to students at the University of Stockholm, he defended his apparent inactivity in the Algerian question and stated that he was worried what could happen to his mother who still lived in Algeria. This led to further ostracism by French left wing intellectuals.
Camus died on January 4, 1960 in a car accident near Sens, in a place named "Le Grand Frossard" in the small town of Villeblevin. Ironically, Camus had uttered a remark earlier in his life that the most absurd way to die would be in a car accident.
The driver of the Facel Vega, Michel Gallimard his publisher and close friend also perished in the accident. Camus was interred in the Lourmarin Cemetery, Lourmarin, Vaucluse, Provence Alpes C te d'Azur, France.
He was survived by his twin children, Catherine and Jean, who hold the copyrights to his work.
After his death, two of Camus's works were published posthumously. The first was an earlier version of ''The Stranger'' entitled ''A Happy Death'' and was published in 1970. The second work was an unfinished novel, ''The First Man'', that Camus was writing before he died. The novel was an autobiographical work about his childhood in Algeria and was published in 1995.
Summary of Absurdism
Many writers have written on the Absurd, each with his or her own interpretation of what the Absurd actually is and their own ideas on the importance of the Absurd. For example, Sartre does little more than acknowledge it while Kierkegaard bases the existence of the God on the fact of the absurd. Camus was not the originator of Absurdism and regretted the continued reference to him as a ''philosopher of the absurd''. He shows less and less interest in the Absurd shortly after publishing ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' (The Myth of Sisyphus). To distinguish Camus's ideas of the Absurd from those of other philosophers, people sometimes refer to the '''Paradox of the Absurd''', when referring to ''Camus's Absurd''.
His early thoughts on the Absurd appeared in his first collection of essays, ''L'Envers et l'endroit'' (The Wrong Side and the Right Side) in 1937. Absurd themes appeared with more sophistication in his second collection of essays, ''Noces'' (Nuptials), in 1938. In these essays Camus does not offer a philosophical account of the Absurd, or even a definition rather he reflects on the experience of the Absurd. In 1942 he published the story of a man living an Absurd life as ''L' tranger'' (The Stranger Outsider), and in the same year releases ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' (The Myth of Sisyphus), a literary essay on the Absurd. He had also written a play about a Roman Emperor, Caligula, pursuing an Absurd logic. However, the play was not performed until 1945. The turning point in Camus's attitude to the Absurd occurs in a collection of letters to a fictitious German friend, published in the newspaper ''Combat''.
Camus' ideas on the Absurd
In the essays Camus presented us with dualisms happiness and sadness, dark and light, life and death, etc. He wanted us to face up to the fact that happiness is fleeting and that we will die. He did this not to be morbid, but so we can love life and enjoy our happiness when it occurs. In ''Le Myth'', this dualism became a paradox we value our lives and existence so greatly, but at the same time we know we will eventually die, and ultimately our endeavours are meaningless. Whilst we can live with a dualism (''I can accept periods of unhappiness, because I know I will also experience happiness to come''), we cannot live with the paradox (''I think my life is of great importance, but I also think it is meaningless''). In ''Le Myth'', Camus was interested in how we experience the Absurd and how we live with it. Our life must have meaning for us to value it. If we accept that life has no meaning and therefore no value, should we kill ourselves?
Meursault, the Absurdist hero of ''L' tranger'', is a murderer who is executed for his crimes. Caligula ends up admitting his Absurd logic was wrong and is killed by an assassination he has deliberately brought about. However, Camus, while obviously suggesting that Caligula's Absurd reasoning is wrong, exalts Meursault as the only Messiah we deserve. ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' raises questions it cannot satisfactorily answer.
Camus' work on the Absurd was intended to promote a public debate. His various offerings entice us to think about the Absurd and offer our own contribution. Concepts such as cooperation, joint effort and solidarity are of key importance to Camus. In the essay ''Enigma'', Camus expressed his frustration at being labeled a philosopher of the absurd. None of his previous work was intended to be a definitive account of his thoughts on the Absurd, although the ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' is often mistaken as such.
Camus made a significant contribution to our understanding of the Absurd, but was not himself an Absurdist. "If nothing had any meaning, you would be right. But there is something that still has a meaning." ''Second Letter to a German Friend'', December 1943.
Famous works
Novels
''The Stranger'' (''L' tranger'', also translated as ''The Outsider) (1942)
''The Plague'' (''La Peste'') (1947)
''The Fall'' (''La Chute'') (1956)
''A Happy Death'' (''La Mort heureuse'') (early version of ''The Stranger'', published posthumously 1970)
''The First Man'' (''Le premier homme'') (incomplete, published posthumously 1995)
Short stories
''Exile and the Kingdom'' (''L'exil et le royaume'') (1957)
''The Guest'' (1957)
''La Femme Adult re'' (1954)
Non fiction
''Betwixt and Between'' (''L'envers et l'endroit'', also translated as ''The Wrong Side and the Right Side'') (collection, 1937)
''Neither Victim Nor Executioner'' (''Combat'') (1946)
''The Myth of Sisyphus'' (''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'') (1942)
''The Rebel'' (''L'Homme r volt '') (1951)
''Notebooks 1935 1942'' (''Carnets, mai 1935 fevrier 1942'') (1962)
''Notebooks 1943 1951'' (1965)
''Nuptials'' (''Noces'')
Plays
''Caligula'' (performed 1945, written 1938)
''The Misunderstanding'' (''Le Malentendu'') (1944)
''State of Siege'' (''L' tat de si ge'') (1948)
''The Just Assassins'' (''Les Justes'') (1949)
Collections
Youthful Writings
''Resistance, Rebellion, and Death'' (1961 Collection of essays selected by the author)
Between Hell and Reason: Essays from the Resistance Newspaper "Combat", 1944 1947 (1991)
Camus at "Combat": Writing 1944 1947 (2005)
Adaptations
Movies
Luchino Visconti made a movie of ''The Stranger'' in 1967, starring Marcello Mastroianni.
Luis Puenzo and Felix Monti were responsible for a modern day rendition of ''The Plague'' in 1991. The film starred William Hurt.
Further Reading
Bibliography
Heiner Wittmann, Albert Camus. ''Kunst und Moral. Dialoghi Dialogues. Literatur und Kultur Italiens und Frankreichs.'' Hrsg. Dirk Hoeges, Peter Lang, Frankfurt M u.a. 2002
succession box before Halldor Laxness title Nobel Prize in Literature winner years 1957 after Boris Pasternak
External links
http: www.romanistik.info camus.html (in German)
! interwiki
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
Camus, Albert
af:Albert Camus
ast:Albert Camus
ca:Albert Camus
cs:Albert Camus
da:Albert Camus
de:Albert Camus
et:Albert Camus
es:Albert Camus
eo:Albert CAMUS
fa:
fr:Albert Camus
gd:Albert Camus
gl:Albert Camus
ko:
hr:Albert Camus
ilo:Albert Camus
id:Albert Camus
is:Albert Camus
it:Albert Camus
he:
la:Albertus Camus
lv:Alb rs Kam
lt:Alberas Kamiu
hu:Albert Camus
nl:Albert Camus
ja:
no:Albert Camus
pl:Albert Camus
pt:Albert Camus
ro:Albert Camus
ru: ,
sh:Alber Kami
sk:Albert Camus
sr:
fi:Albert Camus
sv:Albert Camus
vi:Albert Camus
tr:Albert Camus
uk:
zh:
'''Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie''', DBE (September 15, 1890 January 12, 1976), was a British crime fiction writer. She also wrote romances under the name '''Mary Westmacott'''.
Agatha Christie is the world's best known mystery writer and, apart from William Shakespeare, is the all time best selling author of any genre. Her books have sold over two billion copies in the English language and another billion in over 45 foreign languages (as of 2003). As an example of her broad appeal, she is the all time best selling author in France, with over 40 million copies sold in French (as of 2003) versus 22 million for mile Zola, the nearest contender. She is famously known as the 'Queen of Crime' and is, arguably, the most important and innovative writer in the development of the English mystery novel.
Her stage play ''The Mousetrap'' holds the record for the longest run ever in London, opening at the Ambassadors Theatre on November 25, 1952, and as of 2006 is still running after more than 20,000 performances.
Christie published over eighty novels and stageplays, mainly whodunnits and locked room mysteries, many of these featuring one of her main series characters, Hercule Poirot or Miss Marple. Although she delighted in twisting the established detective fiction form one of her early books, ''The Murder of Roger Ackroyd'', is renowned for its surprise denouement she was scrupulous in "playing fair" with the reader by making sure information for solving the puzzle was given.
Most of her books and short stories have been filmed, some many times over (''Murder on the Orient Express'', ''Death on the Nile'', ''4.50 from Paddington''). The BBC has produced television and radio versions of most of the Poirot and Marple stories. A later series of Poirot dramatizations starring David Suchet was made by Granada Television. In 2004, the Japanese broadcasting company Nippon Housou Kyoukai turned Poirot and Marple into animated characters in the anime series ''Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple'', introducing Mabel West (daughter of Miss Marple's mystery writer nephew Raymond West, a canonical Christie character) and her duck Oliver as new characters.
Biography
in Torquay.
Christened '''Agatha May Clarissa Miller''', in Torquay, Devon, England, she was the daughter of a United States born father and a British mother. (However, she never held U.S. citizenship.)
Christie's first marriage, an unhappy one, was in 1914 to Colonel Archibald Christie, an aviator in the Royal Flying Corps. The couple had one daughter, Rosalind Hicks, and divorced in 1928.
During World War I she worked at a hospital and then a pharmacy, a job that also influenced her work: many of the murders in her books are carried out with poison.
In December 1926 she disappeared for eleven days, causing quite a storm in the press. Her car was found abandoned in a chalk pit. She was eventually found staying at a hotel in Harrogate, where she claimed to have suffered amnesia due to a nervous breakdown following the death of her mother and her husband's confessed infidelity. Opinions are still divided as to whether this was a publicity stunt or not. A 1979 film, ''Agatha'', starring Vanessa Redgrave as Christie, recounted a fictionalised version of the disappearance.
In 1930, Christie married (despite her divorce) a Roman Catholic, Sir Max Mallowan, a British archaeologist 14 years her junior, and her travels with him contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East. Other novels (such as And Then There Were None) were set in and around Torquay, Devon, where she was born.
In 1971 she was granted the title of Dame Commander of the British Empire.
Agatha Christie died on January 12, 1976, at age 85 from natural causes, at Winterbrook House, Cholsey near Wallingford, Oxfordshire. She is buried at St. Mary's Churchyard in Cholsey, Oxon.
Christie's only child, Rosalind Hicks, died on October 28, 2004, also aged 85, from natural causes. Christie's grandson, Matthew Prichard, now owns the royalties to his grandmother's works.
Two of her novels were written at the height of her career but held back until after her death: they were the last cases of Poirot and Miss Marple. In the final Poirot novel ''Curtain'', Christie killed her creation and explained in her diary that she had always found him insufferable. She had a great fondness for Miss Marple, who was based largely on Christie's own grandmother, so she allowed Miss Marple to solve one more mystery in ''Sleeping Murder'' and return to the solitude of her village. However, since ''Sleeping Murder'' had been written quite a while previously, at least one character (Colonel Arthur Bantry, husband of Jane Marple's friend, Dolly) who had been declared deceased in earlier released mysteries reappeared alive and well.
Works
1920 ''The Mysterious Affair at Styles'' (her first book, which introduced Hercule Poirot, Chief Inspector Japp and Captain Hastings)
1922 ''The Secret Adversary'' (introduced Tommy and Tuppence)
1923 ''Murder on the Links''
1924 ''The Man in the Brown Suit''
1924 ''Poirot Investigates'' (eleven short stories)
1925 ''The Secret of Chimneys''
1926 ''The Murder of Roger Ackroyd''
1927 ''The Big Four''
1928 ''The Mystery of the Blue Train'' ISBN 0425130266
1929 ''Partners in Crime'' (fifteen short stories)
1929 ''The Seven Dials Mystery''
1930 ''The Murder at the Vicarage'' (introduced Jane Marple)
1930 ''The Mysterious Mr. Quin'' (introduced Mr. Harley Quin, short stories)
1931 ''The Sittaford Mystery''
1932 ''Peril at End House''
1933 ''The Hound of Death'' (twelve short mysteries)
1933 ''Lord Edgware Dies'' (also known as ''Thirteen at Dinner'')
1933 ''The Thirteen Problems'' (Thirteen short mysteries, featuring Miss Marple)
1934 ''Murder on the Orient Express'' ISBN 0425200450
1934 ''Parker Pyne Investigates'' (twelve short mysteries) (introduced Parker Pyne and Ariadne Oliver)
1934 ''The Listerdale mystery'' (twelve short mysteries)
1935 ''Three Act Tragedy'' (also known as ''Murder in Three Acts'')
1935 ''Why Didn't They Ask Evans?'' (also known as ''The Boomerang Clue'')
1935 ''Death in the Clouds'' (also known as ''Death in the Air'')
1936 ''The A.B.C. Murders'' (also known as ''The Alphabet Murders'')
1936 ''Murder in Mesopotamia''
1936 ''Cards on the Table''
1937 ''Death on the Nile''
1937 ''Dumb Witness'' (also known as ''Poirot Loses a Client'')
1937 ''Murder in the Mews'' (Four short stories, featuring Hercule Poirot)
1938 ''Appointment with Death''
1939 ''And Then There Were None'' (first published as ''Ten Little Niggers'', also known as ''Ten Little Indians'') ISBN 0312979479
1939 ''Murder is Easy'' (also known as ''Easy to Kill'')
1939 ''Hercule Poirot's Christmas'' ISBN 0425177416
1939 ''Regatta Mystery and Other Stories'' (Nine short stories)
1940 ''Sad Cypress''
1941 ''Evil Under the Sun''
1941 ''N or M?''
1941 ''One, Two, Buckle My Shoe'' (also known as ''An Overdose of Death'')
1942 ''The Body in the Library''
1942 ''Five Little Pigs'' (also known as ''Murder in Retrospect'')
1942 ''The Moving Finger''
1944 ''Towards Zero''
1944 ''Sparkling Cyanide'' (also known as ''Remembered Death'')
1945 ''Death Comes as the End''
1946 ''The Hollow'' (also known as ''Murder After Hours'')
1947 ''The Labours of Hercules'' (twelve short mysteries featuring Hercule Poirot)
1948 ''Taken at the Flood'' (also known as ''There is a Tide'')
1948 ''Witness for the Prosecution and Other Stories''
1949 ''Crooked House''
1950 ''A Murder is Announced''
1950 ''Three Blind Mice and Other Stories''
1951 ''They Came to Baghdad''
1951 ''The Under Dog and Other Stories'' (Nine short stories)
1952 ''Mrs McGinty's Dead'' (also known as ''Blood Will Tell'')
1952 ''They Do It with Mirrors''
1953 ''A Pocket Full of Rye''
1953 ''After the Funeral'' (also known as ''Funerals are Fatal'')
1955 ''Hickory Dickory Dock'' (also known as ''Hickory Dickory Death'')
1955 ''Destination Unknown'' (also known as ''So Many Steps to Death'')
1956 ''Dead Man's Folly''
1957 ''4.50 from Paddington'' (also known as ''What Mrs. McGillycuddy Saw'')
1957 ''Ordeal by Innocence''
1959 ''Cat Among the Pigeons''
1960 ''The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding'' (Six short stories)
1961 ''The Pale Horse''
1962 ''The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side''
1963 ''The Clocks''
1964 ''A Caribbean Mystery''
1965 ''At Bertram's Hotel''
1966 ''Third Girl''
1967 ''Endless Night''
1968 ''By the Pricking of My Thumbs''
1969 ''Hallowe'en Party''
1970 ''Passenger to Frankfurt''
1971 ''Nemesis''
1971 ''The Golden Ball and Other Stories'' (Fifteen short stories)
1972 ''Elephants Can Remember''
1973 ''Akhnaton A play in three acts''
1973 ''Postern of Fate'' (final Tommy and Tuppence, last novel Christie wrote)
1974 ''Poirot's Early Cases'' (eighteen short mysteries)
1975 ''Curtain'' (Poirot's last case, written four decades earlier)
1976 ''Sleeping Murder'' (Miss Marple's last case, written four decades earlier)
1979 ''Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories''
1997 ''While the Light Lasts and Other Stories'' (also known as ''The Harlequin Tea Set and Other Stories'')
Co authored works:
1931 ''The Floating Admiral'' written together with G. K. Chesterton, Dorothy L. Sayers and certain other members of the Detection Club.
Plays adapted into novels by Charles Osborne:
1998 ''Black Coffee''
2001 ''The Unexpected Guest''
2003 ''The Spider's Web''
Works written as Mary Westmacott:
1930 ''Giant's Bread''
1934 ''Unfinished Portrait''
1944 ''Absent in the Spring''
1948 ''The Rose and the Yew Tree''
1952 ''A Daughter's a Daughter''
1956 ''The Burden''
Plays:
1928 ''Alibi''
1930 ''Black Coffee''
1936 ''Love from a Stranger''
1937 or 1939 ''A Daughter's a Daughter'' (Never Performed)
1940 ''Peril at End House''
1943 ''Ten Little Indians''
1945 ''Appointment With Death''
1946 ''Murder on the Nile Hiddon Horizon''
1949 ''Murder at the Vicarage''
1951 ''The Hollow''
1952 ''The Mousetrap''
1953 ''Witness for the Prosecution''
1954 ''The Spider's Web''
1956 ''Towards Zero''
1958 ''Verdict''
1958 ''The Unexpected Guest''
1960 ''Go Back for Murder''
1962 ''Rule of Three''
1972 ''Fiddler's Three'' (Originally written as Fiddler's Five. Never Published. Final play she wrote.)
1973 ''Aknaton'' (Written in 1937)
1977 ''Murder is Announced''
1981 ''Cards on the Table''
1993 ''Murder is Easy''
2000? ''And Then There Were None''
Radio Plays:
1937 ''The Yellow Iris''
1947 ''Three Blind Mice''
1948 ''Butter In a Lordly Dish''
1960 ''Personal Call''
Television Plays:
1937 ''Wasp's Nest''
Movie Adaptions
Agatha Christie is no stranger to the cinema. Over the last 78 years, Poirot, Miss Marple, Tommy and Tuppence, Mr. Quin, Parker Pyne, and many others have been portrayed on numerous occasions:
1928 ''Die Abenteuer G. m. b. H'' (The Secret Adversary)
1928 ''The Passing of Mr. Quinn''
1931 ''Alibi''
1931 ''Black Coffee''
1934 ''Lord Edgware Dies''
1937 ''Love From A Stranger''
1945 ''And Then There Were None''
1947 ''Love From A Stranger''
1957 ''Witness for the Prosecution''
1960 ''The Spider's Web''
1962 ''Murder, She Said'' (Based on 4.50 From Paddington)
1963 ''Murder at the Gallop'' (Based on After The Funeral)
1964 ''Murder Most Foul'' (Based on Mrs. McGinty's Dead)
1964 ''Murder Ahoy!'' (An original Movie, not based on any of the books)
1966 ''Ten Little Indians''
1966 ''The Alphabet Murders'' (Based on The ABC Murders)
1972 ''Endless Night''
1974 ''Murder on the Orient Express''
1975 ''Ten Little Indians''
1978 ''Death on the Nile''
1980 ''The Mirror Crack'd''
1982 ''Evil Under the Sun''
1984 ''Ordeal by Innocence''
1988 ''Appointment with Death''
1989 ''Ten Little Indians''
Television Plays
1938 ''Love from a Stranger''
1947 ''Love from a Stranger''
1949 ''Ten Little Indians''
1959 ''Ten Little Indians''
1970 ''Murder at the Vicarage''
1980 ''Why Didn't They Ask Evans?''
1982 ''The Spider's Web''
1982 ''The Seven Dials Mystery''
1982 ''The Agatha Christie Hour''
1982 ''Murder is Easy''
1982 ''The Witness for the Prosecution''
1983 ''Partners in Crime''
1983 ''A Caribbean Mystery''
1983 ''Sparkling Cyanide''
1984 ''The Body in the Library''
1985 ''Murder With Mirrors''
1985 ''The Moving Finger''
1985 ''A Murder Is Announced''
1985 ''A Pocket Full of Rye''
1985 ''Thirten At Dinner''
1986 ''Dead Man's Folly
1986 ''Murder in Three Acts''
1986 ''Murder at the Vicarage''
1987 ''Sleeping Murder''
1987 ''At Bertram's Hotel''
1987 ''Nemesis''
1987 ''4.50 From Paddington''
1989 ''The Man In The Brown Suit''
1989 ''Agatha Christie's Poirot
1989 ''A Caribbean Mystery''
1990 ''Peril at End House''
1990 ''The Mysterious Affair at Styles''
1991 ''They Do It With Mirrors''
1992 ''The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side''
1994 ''Hercule Poirot's Christmas''
1995 ''Murder on the Links''
1995 ''Hickory Dickory Dock''
1996 ''Dumb Witness''
1997 ''The Pale Horse''
2000 ''The Murder of Rodger Ackroyd''
2000 ''Lord Edgware Dies''
2001 ''Evil Under The Sun''
2001 ''Murder on the Orient Express''
2001 ''Murder in Mesopotamia''
2003 ''Sparkling Cyanide''
2004 ''Five Little Pigs''
2004 ''Death On The Nile''
2004 ''Sad Cypress''
2004 ''The Hollow''
2004 ''Marple''
2004 ''The Body in the Library''
2004 ''Murder at the Vicarage''
2004 ''Appointment with Death''
2005 ''A Murder is Announced''
2005 ''The Mystery of the Blue Train''
2005 ''Cards on the Table''
2005 ''Sleeping Murder''
2005 ''Taken at the Flood''
2006 ''After the Funeral''
2006 ''The Moving Finger''
2006 ''By the Pricking of my Thumbs''
2006 ''The Sittaford Mystery''
2007 ''Hercule Poirot's Christmas'' (A french film adaption)
Video Games
2005 ''And Then There Were None''
Agatha Christie in fiction
Dame Agatha appears as one of the title characters, with Dorothy L. Sayers, in the fictional murder mystery ''Dorothy and Agatha'' by Gaylord Larsen.
''The Poisoned Chocolates Case'' by Anthony Berkeley contains characters based on Christie, Sayers, Carr, and Chesterton.
The movie Agatha which was released in 1979, was about a fictional solution to the real mystery of Agatha Christie's disappearance in 1926. Her chracter was played by Vanessa Redgrave. Other cast members included Dustin Hoffman and Timothy Dalton.
External links
first editions illustrated
of '' The Mysterious Affair at Styles'' at
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
Christie, Agatha
ar:
bg:
cs:Agatha Christie
cy:Agatha Christie
da:Agatha Christie
de:Agatha Christie
es:Agatha Christie
eo:Agatha CHRISTIE
fr:Agatha Christie
fy:Agatha Christie
hr:Agatha Christie
id:Agatha Christie
it:Agatha Christie
la:Agatha Christie
he:
hu:Agatha Christie
nl:Agatha Christie
ja:
no:Agatha Christie
pl:Agatha Christie
pt:Agatha Christie
ru: ,
sq:Agatha Christie
sk:Agatha Christie
sr:
fi:Agatha Christie
sv:Agatha Christie
zh:
:''For other uses, see Plague (disambiguation).''
'''''The Plague''''' (''fr.'' '''''La Peste''''') is a novel by Albert Camus, published in 1947, that tells the story of medical workers finding solidarity in their labor as the Algerian city of Oran is swept by a plague. It asks a number of questions relating to the nature of destiny and the human condition. The characters in the book, ranging from doctors to vacationers to fugitives, all help to show the effects the plague has on a populace.
Generally taken as a metaphoric treatment of the French resistance to Nazi occupation during World War II, ''The Plague'' is interpreted to mean much more. Camus uses extreme hardships (e.g., pain, suffering, and death) to represent our human world. The story is told through the narrative of the main character, Dr. Rieux, whose decidedly existential account of events in the story is not only helpful in exploring the philosophy of existentialism, but also in making this a metaphor of the nature of life and suffering. Although his approach in the book is severe, he emphasizes the ideas that we ultimately have no control, irrationality of life is inevitable, and he further illustrates the human reaction towards the absurd . ''The Plague'' represents how the world deals with the philosophical notion of the Absurd, a theory which Camus himself helped to define.
Main Characters
Dr. Bernard Rieux
Jean Tarrou a man vacationing in Oran
Raymond Rambert visiting journalist
Cottard a fugitive
Joseph Grand municipal worker who desires to be an author
Father Paneloux a priest
Minor Characters
Brakeley
Castel
Mme. Rieux
M. Othon and his family
The old man (Cat spitting guy)
Asthma patient
Gonzalas
Richard
Prefect
Marcel and Louis
Plague, The
Plague, The
Plague, The
de:Die Pest
es:La peste (novela)
fr:La Peste
he:
pl:D uma (powie )
fi:Rutto (romaani)
vi:D ch h ch (truy n)
uk: ( )
zh: ( )
'''Applied ethics''' takes a theory of ethics, such as utilitarianism, social contract theory, or deontology, and applies its major principles to a particular set of circumstances and practices. Typical examples include applied fields such as medical ethics, legal ethics, environmental ethics, computer ethics, corporate social responsibility, or business ethics. Many considerations of applied ethics also come into play in human rights discussions.
The chief difficulty with formal, applied ethics is the potential for disagreement over what constitutes the proper theory or principles to apply, which is bound to result in solutions to specific problems that are not universally acceptable to all participants. For example, a strict deontological approach would never permit us to deceive a patient about his condition, whereas a utilitarian approach would have us consider the consequences of doing so. A deontologist will often come up with a very different solution than would a utilitarian, given the same facts.
One modern approach attempting to address this is casuistry. Casuistry attempts to establish a plan of action to respond to particular facts a form of case based reasoning. By doing so in advance of actual investigation of the facts, it can reduce influence of interest groups. By focusing on action and not the rationale, it increases the possibility of agreement between prior bodies of precedent and explicit moral codes.
List of subfields of applied ethics
Medical ethics bioethics
Business ethics
Environmental ethics (e.g. global warming)
Human rights issues (e.g. gender ethics sexism, racism, death penalty)
Animal rights issues
Legal ethics
Computer ethics
Media ethics journalism ethics
Research ethics
Education ethics
Sports ethics
Military ethics
International ethics (e.g. world hunger)
See also
Ethics
Ethical codes
List of ethics topics
Bibliography
!
Useful templates
(monograph)
Anthologies
Journals
(since 1890)
External links
Category:Ethics
de:Praktische Ethik
fr: thique appliqu e
sv:Till mpad etik
Image:OldEichmann.jpg 225px thumb Adolf Eichmann, Germany 1940
Photo from United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Photo Archives.
'''Adolf Otto Eichmann''' (March 19, 1906 June 1, 1962), born '''Karl Adolf Eichmann''', was a high ranking official in Nazi Germany and served as an ''Obersturmbannf hrer'' in the S.S. He was largely responsible for the logistics of the extermination of millions of people during the Holocaust, in particular Jews, which was called the "final solution" (''Endl sung''). He organized the identification and transportation of people to the various concentration camps. Therefore, he is often referred to as the 'Chief Executioner' of the Third Reich.
Early life
Born in Solingen, Germany, Adolf Eichmann was the son of a moderately successful businessman and industrialist. In 1914, his family moved to Linz, Austria, and during the First World War, Eichmann's father served in the Austro Hungarian Army. At the war's conclusion, Eichmann's father returned to the family business in Linz. In 1920, Eichmann's family moved to Germany.
Pre Nazi years
When Eichmann came of age in 1925, he returned to Austria to study mechanical engineering. Being a poor student, however, he soon dropped out of college. Eichmann then tried to follow in his father's footsteps in business, working as a travelling salesman which brought him back to Germany in 1930.
Eichmann's first contact with the Nazi Party was when he joined the Wandervogel movement, which has been described as "a peasant Aryan brotherhood based on Anti Semitic ideals". There is evidence, however, that some of the ''Wandervogel'' groups had Jewish members, and anti Semitism may have existed in only some parts of the movement. In 1932, Eichmann returned again to Austria and formally joined the Austrian Nazi Party at the age of twenty six.
Nazi Party and the SS
Adolf Eichmann in 1933
On the advice of old family friend Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Eichmann joined the Austrian branch of the SS, enlisting on April 1 1932, as an ''SS Anw rter''. He was accepted as a full SS member that November, appointed an ''SS Mann'', and assigned the SS number 45326.
For the next year, Eichmann was a member of the part time Allgemeine SS and served in a mustering formation operating from Salzburg.
In 1933 when the Nazis came to power in Germany, Eichmann returned to that country and submitted an application to join the full time SS. This was accepted, and in November of 1933, Eichmann was promoted to ''Scharf hrer'' and assigned to the administrative staff of the Dachau concentration camp.
By 1934, Eichmann had chosen to make the SS a career and requested transfer into the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (Security Police) which had, by that time, become a very powerful and feared organization. Eichmann's transfer was granted in November of 1934, as he was promoted to the rank of ''Oberscharf hrer'' and assigned to the headquarters of the Sicherheitsdienst (SD) in Berlin. Eichmann became a model administrator in the SD and quickly became noticed by his superiors. He was promoted to ''Hauptscharf hrer'' in 1935 and, in 1937, commissioned as an ''SS Untersturmf hrer''.
In 1937 Eichmann was sent to Palestine with his superior Herbert Hagen to assess the possibilities of massive Jewish emigration from Germany to Palestine. They landed in Haifa but could only obtain a transit visa so they went on to Cairo. In Cairo they met Feival Polkes, an agent of the Haganah, who discussed with them the plans of the Zionists and tried to enlist their assistance in facilitating Jewish emigration from Europe. According to an answer Eichmann gave at his trial, he had also planned to meet Arab leaders in Palestine this never happened because entry to Palestine was refused by the British authorities. Afterwards Eichmann and Hagen wrote a report recommending against large scale emigration to Palestine for economic reasons and because it contradicted the German policy of preventing the establishment of a Jewish state there. This episode is sometimes seen as an important step towards the Nazi abandonment of emigration as the preferred "solution to the Jewish problem".
In 1938, Eichmann was assigned to Austria to help organize SS Security Forces in Vienna after the Anschluss of Austria into Germany. Through this effort, Eichmann was promoted to ''SS Obersturmf hrer'', and by the end of 1938, Adolf Eichmann had been selected by the SS leadership to form the Central Office for Jewish Emigration, which was in charge of forcibly deporting and expelling Jews from Austria. Through this work, Eichmann became a student of Judaism, finding the religion fascinating while also developing deep Anti Semitic values and a hatred of the Jewish faith.
World War II
At the start of the Second World War, Eichmann had been promoted to ''SS Hauptsturmf hrer'' and had made a name for himself with his Office for Jewish Emigration. Through this work Eichmann made several contacts in the Zionist movement which he worked with to speed up Jewish Emigration from the Reich.
Eichmann returned to Berlin in 1939 after the formation of the Reich Central Security Office (RSHA). In December 1939, he was assigned to head ''RSHA Referat IV D4'', the RSHA department that dealt with Jewish affairs and evacuation. In August 1940, he released his ''Reichssicherheitshauptamt: Madagaskar Projekt'' (Reich Central Security Office: Madagascar Project), a plan for forced Jewish deportation that never materialized. He was promoted to the rank of ''SS Sturmbannf hrer'' in late 1940, and less than a year later to ''Obersturmbannf hrer''.
In 1942, Reinhard Heydrich invited Eichmann to attend the Wannsee Conference where Germany's anti Jewish measures were set down into an official policy of genocide. To this "Final Solution of the Jewish Question" Eichmann was tasked as "Transportation Administrator", which put him in charge of all the trains which would carry Jews to the Death Camps in Poland. For the next two years, Eichmann performed his duties with incredible zeal, often bragging that he had personally sent over five million Jews to their deaths by way of his trains.
Eichmann's work had been noticed, and in 1944, he was sent to Hungary after Germany had occupied that country in fear of a Soviet invasion. Eichmann at once went to work deporting Jews and was able to send four hundred thousand Hungarians to their deaths in the Nazi gas chambers.
By 1945, Eichmann's world was collapsing, as Reich Leader Heinrich Himmler had ordered that Jewish extermination be halted and evidence of the Final Solution be destroyed. Eichmann blatantly turned against Himmler and continued his work in Hungary against official orders. Eichmann was also working to avoid being called up in the last ditch German military effort, since a year before he had been commissioned as a Reserve ''Untersturmf hrer'' in the Waffen SS and was now being ordered to active combat duty.
Eichmann fled Hungary in 1945 as the Russians invaded, and he returned to Austria where he met up with his old friend Ernst Kaltenbrunner. Kaltenbrunner, however, refused to associate with Eichmann since Eichmann's duties as an extermination administrator had left him a marked man by the Allies.
Post World War II
At the end of World War II, Eichmann was captured by the US Army, who did not know that this man who presented himself as "Otto Eckmann" was in fact a much bigger fish. Early in 1946, he escaped from US custody and hid in various parts of Germany for a few years. In 1948 he obtained a landing permit for Argentina, but did not seek to use it immediately. At the beginning of 1950, Eichmann went to Italy, where he posed as a refugee named Ricardo Klement. With the help of a Franciscan monk who had connections with archbishop Alois Hudal, Eichmann obtained an International Committee of the Red Cross humanitarian passport and an Argentinian visa. He arrived by ship in Argentina on July 14, 1950. For the next ten years, he worked in several odd jobs in the Buenos Aires area (from factory foreman, to junior water engineer and professional rabbit farmer). Eichmann also brought his family to Argentina. Argentina at the time was a haven for many Nazis.
Capture
Throughout the 1950s many Jews and other victims of the Holocaust dedicated themselves to finding Eichmann and other Nazi war criminals. Among them was Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal. In 1954, Wiesenthal's suspicions that Eichmann was in Argentina were sparked upon receiving a postcard from an associate who had moved to Buenos Aires. "I saw that dirty pig Eichmann," the letter read in part, "He lives near Buenos Aires and works for a water company". With this (and other) information collected by Wiesenthal, the Israelis had solid leads regarding Eichmann's whereabouts. Isser Harel, the then head of Mossad (Israeli intelligence agency), later claimed in an unpublished manuscript that Wiesenthal "'had no role whatsoever' in Eichmann's apprehension but in fact had endangered the entire Eichmann operation and aborted the planned capture of Auschwitz doctor Josef Mengele." (Schachter, Jonathan "Isser Harel Takes On Nazi Hunter. Wiesenthal 'Had No Role' In Eichmann Kidnapping." The Jerusalem Post 7 May 1991)
Also instrumental in exposing Eichmann's identity was Lothar Hermann, a worker of Jewish descent who fled to Argentina from Germany following his incarceration in the Dachau concentration camp, where Eichmann had served as an administrator. By the 1950s, Hermann had settled into life in Buenos Aires with his family daughter Sylvia became acquainted with the Eichmann family and romantically involved with Klaus, the oldest Eichmann son. Due to Klaus's boastful remarks about his father's life as a Nazi and direct responsibility for the Holocaust, Hermann knew he had struck gold in 1957 after reading a newspaper report about German war criminals of which Eichmann was one. Soon after, he sent Sylvia to the Eichmanns' home on a fact finding mission. She was met at the door by Eichmann himself, and after unsuccessfully asking for Klaus, she inquired as to whether she was speaking to his father. Eichmann confirmed this fact. Excited, Hermann soon began a correspondence with Fritz Bauer, chief prosecutor for the West German state of Hesse, and provided details about Eichmann's person and life. Bauer knew that Germany, served by former employees of the Nazi regime, would do little to serve justice to Eichmann. He contacted Israeli officials, who worked closely with Hermann over the next several years to learn about Eichmann and to formulate a plan to capture him.
In 1960, the Mossad discovered that Eichmann was in Argentina and began an effort to locate his exact whereabouts when, through relentless surveillance, it was confirmed that Ricardo Klement was, in fact, Adolf Eichmann. The Israeli government then approved an operation to capture Eichmann and bring him to Jerusalem for trial as a war criminal. He was captured by a team of Mossad agents on May 11, 1960, as part of a covert operation. He was flown aboard an El Al airliner from Argentina to Israel on May 21, 1960.
For some time the Israeli government denied involvement in Eichmann's capture, claiming that he had been taken by Jewish volunteers. Eventually, however, the pretense was dropped, and then prime minister David Ben Gurion announced Eichmann's capture to the Knesset (Israel's national legislature) on May 23 1960, receiving a standing ovation in return. Isser Harel, head of the Mossad at the time of the operation, wrote a book about Eichmann's capture entitled ''The House on Garibaldi Street'' some years later a member of the capture team, Peter Malkin, authored ''Eichmann in my Hands'', a book that contains fascinating insights into Eichmann's character and motivations, but whose veracity has been attacked.
Trial
Eichmann's trial in front of an Israeli court in Jerusalem started on April 11, 1961. He was indicted on 15 criminal charges, including charges of crimes against humanity, crimes against the Jewish people and membership of an outlawed organization. As in Israeli criminal procedure, his trial was presided over by three judges. Gideon Hausner, the Israeli attorney general, personally acted as chief prosecutor.
The trial caused huge international controversy as well as an international sensation. The Israeli government allowed news programs all over the world to broadcast the trial live with few restrictions. Television viewers saw a nondescript man sitting in a bulletproof glass booth while witnesses, including many Holocaust survivors, testified against him and his role in transporting victims to the extermination camps. During the whole trial, Eichmann insisted that he was only "following orders" the same defense used by the Nazi war criminals during the 1945 1946 Nuremberg Trials. He explicitly declared that he had abdicated his consciousness in order to follow the ''F hrerprinzip''. This defense in turn promoted the Milgram experiment.
After 14 weeks of testimony with more than 1,500 documents, 100 prosecution witnesses (90 of whom were Nazi concentration camp survivors) and dozens of defense depositions delivered by diplomatic couriers from 16 different countries, the Eichmann trial ended on August 14, 1961 where the judges were then left to deliberate. On December 11 the three judges announced their verdict where Eichmann was convicted on all counts. He was then sentenced to death on December 15, 1961. Eichmann appealed the verdict, mostly relying on legal arguments about Israel's jurisdiction and the legality of the laws under which he was charged. He also claimed that he was protected by the principle of "Acts of State" and repeated his "superior orders" defence. On May 29, 1962 Israel's Supreme Court, sitting as a Court of Criminal Appeal, rejected the appeal and upheld the District Court's judgment on all counts. On May 31, Israeli president Itzhak Ben Zvi turned down Eichmann's petition for mercy. Eichmann was hanged a few minutes after midnight on June 1, 1962, at Ramla prison, officially the only civil execution ever carried out in Israel. Eichmann allegedly refused a last meal, preferring instead a bottle of Carmel, a dry red Israeli wine of which he consumed about half of the bottle. He also refused to don the traditional black hood for his execution.
His last words were, reportedly, "Long live Germany. Long live Austria. Long live Argentina. These are the countries with which I have been most closely associated and I shall not forget them. I had to obey the rules of war and my flag. I am ready."
His body was cremated and ashes scattered at sea the very next morning, so that no nation would serve as Adolf Eichmann's final resting place.
Eichmann analysis
In the 40 years since Eichmann's death, historians have speculated on certain facts regarding his life. The most important question is how responsible Eichmann was for the implementation of the Holocaust. Most agree that Eichmann knew exactly what he was doing however, some "Eichmann Defenders" (his son included) state that he was unfairly judged and that he was only doing his duty as a German soldier.
A third and highly controversial analysis came from political theorist Hannah Arendt, a Jew who fled Germany before Hitler's rise, and who reported on Eichmann's trial for ''The New Yorker'' magazine. In ''Eichmann in Jerusalem'', a book formed by this reporting, Arendt concluded that, aside from a desire for improving his career, Eichmann showed no trace of anti Semitism or psychological damage. She called him the embodiment of the "banality of evil," as he appeared at his trial to have an ordinary and common personality, displaying neither guilt nor hatred. She suggested that this most strikingly discredits the idea that the Nazi criminals were manifestly psychopathic and different from ordinary people. (Many concluded from this and similar observations that even the most ordinary of people can commit horrendous crimes if placed in the right situation, and given the correct incentives, but Arendt disagreed with this interpretation.)
Eichmann's involvement with the SS Underground Group ODESSA is also a mystery, as there is evidence that Eichmann had contact with the group but did not actively participate in ODESSA activities. Rumours also abound as to whether or not Eichmann personally knew Josef Mengele and whether or not the two war criminals ever worked together in South America. Mossad was convinced that Eichmann was a contact for Mengele and had planned to conduct a dual capture operation in 1961 had Eichmann revealed Mengele's whereabouts.
A footnote to Eichmann's SS career focuses on the point as to why he was never promoted to the rank of full SS Colonel, known as ''Standartenf hrer''. With Eichmann's record and responsibilities, he would have been a prime candidate for advancement, yet after 1941, his SS record contains no evidence that he was ever even recommended for another promotion. Many have speculated that Ernst Kaltenbrunner may have seen Eichmann as a dangerous man, rising through the SS ranks, and had curbed his SS career to prevent Eichmann from becoming too powerful.
Books
Hannah Arendt, ''Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil'' (1963)
David Cesarani, ''Eichmann: His Life and Times'' (2004)
Harry Mulisch, ''Case 40 61 report on the Eichmann trial'' (1963)
Moshe Pearlman: ''The Capture of Adolf Eichmann'', 1961. (cited in Hannah Arendt: ''Eichmann in Jerusalem'', Penguin, 1994, p.235)
Pierre de Villemarest, ''Untouchable Who protected Bormann Gestapo M ller after 1945...,'' Aquilion, 2005, ISBN 1904997023 (Gestapo M ller was one of the chiefs of Adolf Eichmann)
External links
from the Jewish Virtual Library
Provided by the ''National Security Archive''
Provided by the ''Nizkor Project''
! Interlanguage links
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
Eichmann, Adolf
ar:
bg:
da:Adolf Eichmann
de:Adolf Eichmann
eo:Adolf EICHMANN
es:Adolf Eichmann
fi:Adolf Eichmann
fr:Adolf Eichmann
he:
hr:Adolf Eichmann
hu:Adolf Eichmann
it:Adolf Eichmann
ja:
ka: ,
ko:
nl:Adolf Eichmann
no:Adolf Eichmann
pl:Adolf Eichmann
pt:Adolf Eichmann
ru: ,
sk:Adolf Eichmann
sr:
sv:Adolf Eichmann
zh:
In mathematics, the '''absolute value''' (or '''modulus'''sup id "ref Argand"small1 small sup) of a real number is its numerical value without regard to its sign. So, for example, 3 is the absolute value of both 3 and 3. In computers, the mathematical function used to perform this calculation is usually given the name '''abs()'''.
Generalizations of the absolute value for real numbers occur in a wide variety of mathematical settings. For example an absolute value is also defined for the complex numbers, the quaternions, ordered rings, fields and vector spaces.
The absolute value is closely related to the notions of magnitude, distance, and norm in various mathematical and physical contexts.
Real numbers
For any real number matha, math the '''absolute value''' or '''modulus''' of matha, math is denoted sup id "ref Wolfram"small2 small sup math a , math and is defined as
:math a : begin cases a, 0. end cases math
As can be seen from the above definition, the absolute value of matha math is always either positive or zero, never negative.
From a geometric point of view, the absolute value of a real number is the distance along the real number line of that number from zero, and more generally the absolute value of the difference of two real numbers is the distance between them. Indeed the notion of an abstract distance function in mathematics can be seen to be a generalization of the properties of the absolute value (see "Distance" below).
The following proposition, gives an identity which is sometimes used as an alternative (and equivalent) definition of the absolute value:
'''PROPOSITION 1''':
:math a sqrt a 2 math
The absolute value has the following four fundamental properties:
'''PROPOSITION 2''':
: cellpadding 10
math a ge 0 math
Non negativity
math a 0 iff a 0 math
Positive definiteness
math ab a b , math
Multiplicativeness
math a b le a b math
Subadditivity
Other important properties of the absolute value include:
'''PROPOSITION 3''':
: cellpadding 10
math a a , math
Symmetry
math a b 0 iff a b math
Identity of indiscernibles (equivalent to positive definiteness)
math a b le a c c b math
Triangle inequality (equivalent to subadditivity)
math a b a b mbox (if b ne 0) , math
Preservation of division (equivalent to multiplicativeness)
math a b ge a b math
(equivalent to subadditivity)
Two other useful inequalities are:
:math a le b iff b le a le b math
:math a ge b iff a le b mbox or b le a math
The above are often used in solving inequalities for example:
:
math x 3 le 9 math
math iff 9 le x 3 le 9 math
math iff 6 le x le 12 math
Complex numbers
div style "float:right margin left:3px margin right:3px" title "Graphic Representation"
image:complex.png
div
Since the complex numbers are not ordered, the definition given above for the real absolute value cannot be directly generalized for a complex number. However the identity given in Proposition 1:
:math a sqrt a 2 math
can be seen as motivating the following definition.
For any complex number
:mathz x iy , math
the '''absolute value''' or '''modulus''' of mathz math is denoted math z , math and is defined as
:math z : sqrt x 2 y 2 . math
It follows that the absolute value of a real number ''x'' is equal to its absolute value considered as a complex number since:
:math x i0 sqrt x 2 0 2 sqrt x 2 x . math
Similar to the geometric interpretation of the absolute value for real numbers, it follows from the Pythagorean theorem that the absolute value of a complex number is the distance in the complex plane of that complex number from the origin, and more generally, that the absolute value of the difference of two complex numbers is equal to the distance between those two complex numbers.
The complex absolute value shares all the properties of the real absolute value given in Propositions 2 and 3 above. In addition, If
:math z x mathrm i y r ( cos phi mathrm i sin phi ) , math
and
:math bar z x iy math
is the complex conjugate of mathz math, then it is easily seen that
:math z r , math
:math z bar z math
:math z sqrt z bar z math
Absolute value functions
The real absolute value function is continuous everywhere. It is differentiable everywhere except for ''x'' 0. It is monotonically decreasing on the interval nowiki( , 0 nowiki and monotonically increasing on the interval nowiki 0, ) nowiki. Since a real number and its negative have the same absolute value, it is an even function, and is hence not invertible.
The complex absolute value function is continuous everywhere but differentiable ''nowhere'' (One way to see this is to show that it does not obey the Cauchy Riemann equations).
Both the real and complex functions are idempotent.
Ordered rings
The definition of absolute value given for real numbers above can easily be extended to any ordered ring. That is, if matha math is an element of an ordered ring mathR math, then the '''absolute value''' of matha math, denoted by math a math, is defined to be:
:math a : begin cases a, 0, end cases math
where math a math is the additive inverse of matha math, and math0 math is the additive identity element.
Distance
The absolute value is closely related to the idea of distance. As noted above, the absolute value of a real or complex number is the distance from that number to the origin, along the real number line, for real numbers, or in the complex plane, for complex numbers, and more generally, the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers is the distance between them.
The standard Euclidean distance between two points
:matha (a 1, a 2, cdots , a n) math
and
:mathb (b 1, b 2, cdots , b n) math
in Euclidean ''n'' space is defined as:
:math sqrt (a 1 b 1) 2 (a 2 b 2) 2 cdots (a n b n) 2 . math
This can be seen to be a generalization of math a b , math since if matha, math mathb math are real, then by Proposition 1,
:math a b sqrt (a b) 2 math
while if
:math a a 1 i a 2 , math
and
:math b b 1 i b 2 , math
are complex numbers, then
: cellpadding 10
math a b , math
math (a 1 i a 2) (b 1 i b 2) , math
math (a 1 b 1) i(a 2 b 2) , math
math sqrt (a 1 b 1) 2 (a 2 b 2) 2 math
The above shows that the "absolute value" distance for the real numbers or the complex numbers, agrees with the standard Euclidean distance they inherit as a result of considering them as the one and two dimensional Euclidean spaces respectively.
The properties of the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers: non negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and the triangle inequality given in Propositions 2 and 3 above, can be seen to motivate the more general notion of a distance function as follows:
A real valued function mathd math on a set mathX times X math is called a '''distance function''' (or a '''metric''') for mathX math, if it satisfies the following four axioms:
: cellpadding 10
mathd(a, b) ge 0 math
Non negativity
mathd(a, b) 0 iff a b math
Identity of indiscernibles
mathd(a, b) d(b, a) , math
Symmetry
mathd(a b) le d(a, c) d(c, b) math
Triangle inequality
Fields
The fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers given in Proposition 2 above, can be used to generalize the notion of absolute value to an arbitrary field, as follows.
A real valued function mathv math on a field mathF math is called an '''absolute value''' (also a ''modulus'', ''magnitude'', ''value'', or ''valuation'') if it satisfies the following four axioms:
: cellpadding 10
mathv(a) ge 0 math
Non negativity
mathv(a) 0 iff a 0 math
Positive definiteness
mathv(ab) v(a) v(b) , math
Multiplicativeness
mathv(a b) le v(a) v(b) math
Subadditivity or the triangle inequality
It follows from the above that mathv(1) 1 math, where math1 math denotes the multiplicative identity element of mathF math. The real and complex absolute values defined above are examples of absolute values for an arbitrary field.
If mathv math is an absolute value on mathF math, then the function mathd math on mathF times F math, defined by mathd(a, b) v(a b) math, is a metric, and if math e math is the multiplicative identity in mathF math, then the following are equivalent:
mathd math satisfies the ultrametric inequality math d(x, y) le mathrm max d(x, z), d(y, z) . math
math big v Big( sum k 1 n e Big) : n in mathbb N big math is bounded in '''R'''.
math v Big( sum k 1 n e Big) le 1 math for every math n in mathbb N . math
math v(a b) le mathrm max v(a), v(b) math for all math a, b in F. math
An absolute value which satisfies any (hence all) of the above conditions is said to be '''non Archimedean''', otherwise it is said to be Archimedean.sup id "ref Schechter"small3 small sup
Vector spaces
Again the fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers, can be used, with a slight modification, to generalize the notion to an arbitrary vector space.
A real valued function on a vector space mathV math a over a field mathF math, is called an '''absolute value''' (or more usually a '''norm''') if it satisfies the following axioms:
For all matha math in mathF math, and math mathbf v math, math mathbf u math in mathV math,
: cellpadding 10
math mathbf v ge 0 math
Non negativity
math mathbf v 0 iff mathbf v 0 math
Positive definiteness
math a mathbf v a mathbf v math
Positive homogeneity or positive scalability
math mathbf v mathbf u le mathbf v mathbf u math
Subadditivity or triangle inequality
The norm of a vector is also called its ''length'' or ''magnitude''.
In the case of Euclidean space '''R'''sup''n'' sup, the function
:math (x 1, x 2, cdots , x n) sqrt sum i 1 n (x i) 2 math
is a norm called the Euclidean norm. When the real numbers '''R''' are considered as the one dimensional vector space '''R'''sup1 sup, the absolute value is a norm, and is the ''p'' norm for any ''p''. In fact the absolute value is the "only" norm in '''R'''sup1 sup, in the sense that, for every norm in '''R'''sup1 sup, ''x'' 1 ''x'' . The complex absolute value is a special case of the norm in an inner product space. It is identical to the Euclidean norm, if the complex plane is identified with the Euclidean plane '''R'''sup2 sup.
Algorithms
In the C programming language, the codeabs() code, codelabs() code, codellabs() code (in C99), codefabs() code, codefabsf() code, and codefabsl() code functions compute the absolute value of an operand. Coding the integer version of the function is trivial, ignoring the boundary case where the largest negative integer is input:
int abs(int i)
if (i 0)
return i
else
return i
The floating point versions are trickier, as they have to contend with special codes for infinity and not a numbers.
Using assembly language, it is possible to take the absolute value of a register in just three instructions (example shown for a 32 bit register on an x86 architecture, Intel syntax):
cdq
xor eax, edx
sub eax, edx
codecdq code extends the sign bit of codeeax code into codeedx code. If codeeax code is nonnegative, then codeedx code becomes zero, and the latter two instructions have no effect, leaving codeeax code unchanged. If codeeax code is negative, then codeedx code becomes 0xFFFFFFFF, or 1. The next two instructions then become a two's complement inversion, giving the absolute value of the negative value in codeeax code.
References
Nahin, Paul J. Princeton University Press (hardcover, 1998). ISBN 0691027951
O'Connor, J.J. and Robertson, E.F.
Schechter, Eric ''Handbook of Analysis and Its Foundations'', pp 259 263, , Academic Press (1997) ISBN 0126227608
Weisstein, Eric W. MathWorld:
Notes
div id "endnote Argand"supsmall1 small sup Jean Robert Argand, is credited with introducing the term "modulus" in 1806, see: , , and . div
div id "endnote Wolfram"supsmall2 small sup credits Karl Weierstrass with introducing the notation ''x'' in 1841. div
div id "endnote Schechter"supsmall3 small sup . div
Category:Numeration
cs:Absolutn hodnota
de:Absoluter Betrag
es:Valor absoluto
eo:Absoluta valoro
fr:Valeur absolue
gl:Valor absoluto
is:Algildi
it:Valore assoluto
he:
nl:Absolute waarde
ja:
pl:Warto bezwzgl dna
pt:Valor absoluto
ru:
sk:Absol tna hodnota
sl:Absolutna vrednost
sr:
fi:Itseisarvo
sv:Absolutbelopp
th:
vi:Gi tr tuy t i
tr:Mutlak de er
uk:
zh:
Infobox protected area name Arches National Park
iucn category II
image US Locator Blank.svg
caption
locator x 70
locator y 84
location Utah, USA
nearest city Moab, Utah
lat degrees 38
lat minutes 41
lat seconds 0
lat direction N
long degrees 109
long minutes 34
long seconds 0
long direction W
area 76,358.98 acresbrfont size " 2" (76,193.01 federal) fontbr309.01 km
established April 12, 1929
visitation num 733,131
visitation year 2004
governing body National Park Service
'''Arches National Park''' preserves over 2,000 natural sandstone arches, including the world famous Delicate Arch, in addition to a variety of unique geological resources and formations.
The park is located near Moab, Utah, and is 119 square miles (309 km ) in size. Its highest elevation is 5,653 feet (1,723 m) at Elephant Butte and its lowest elevation is 4,085 feet (1,245 m) at the visitor center. It receives 10 inches (250 mm) of rain a year on average.
The area, administered by the National Park Service, was originally designated as a national monument on April 12, 1929. It was redesignated a national park on November 12, 1971. More than 730,000 people visited it in 2004.
Features
Among the notable features of the park are:
Delicate Arch, a lone standing arch which has become a symbol of Utah
Balanced Rock, a large balancing rock
Double Arch, two arches located close to each other
Landscape Arch, a very thin, long arch over 300 feet (100 m), the largest in the park
Fiery Furnace, an area of maze like narrow passages and tall rock columns
Devil's Garden, with many arches and columns scattered along a ridge
Dark Angel, a free standing column of dark stone at the end of the Devil's Garden trail
Courthouse Towers, a collection of tall columns
Petrified dunes, petrified remnants of sand dunes blown from the ancient lakes that covered the area
Geology
The national park lies atop an underground salt bed, which is basically responsible for the arches and spires, balanced rocks, sandstone fins, and eroded monoliths in the area. Thousands of feet thick in places, this salt bed was deposited over the Colorado Plateau some 300 million years ago when a sea flowed into the region and eventually evaporated. Over millions of years, the salt bed was covered with residue from floods and winds and the oceans that came in intervals. Much of this debris was compressed into rock. At one time this overlying earth may have been one mile thick.
Salt under pressure is unstable, and the salt bed below Arches was no match for the weight of this thick cover of rock. Under such pressure it shifted, buckled, liquefied, and repositioned itself, thrusting the Earth layers upward into domes. Whole sections dropped into cavities. In places they turned almost on edge. Faults occurred. The result of one such 2,500 foot displacement, the Moab Fault, is seen from the visitor center.
As this subsurface movement of salt shaped the Earth, surface erosion stripped away the younger rock layers. Except for isolated remnants, the major formations visible in the park today are the salmon colored Entrada Sandstone, in which most of the arches form, and the buff colored Navajo Sandstone. These are visible in layer cake fashion throughout most of the park. Over time water seeped into the superficial cracks, joints, and folds of these layers. Ice formed in the fissures, expanding and putting pressure on surrounding rock, breaking off bits and pieces. Winds later cleaned out the loose particles. A series of free standing fins remained. Wind and water attacked these fins until, in some, the cementing material gave way and chunks of rock tumbled out. Many damaged fins collapsed. Others, with the right degree of hardness and balance, survived despite their missing sections. These became the famous arches. This is the geologic story of Arches probably. The evidence is largely circumstantial.
History
Humans have occupied the region since the last ice age 10,000 years ago. Fremont people and Ancient Pueblo People lived in the area up until about 700 years ago. Spanish missionaries encountered Ute and Paitue tribes in the area when they first came through in 1775, but the first European Americans to attempt settlement in the area were the Mormon Elk Mountain Mission in 1855, but then soon abandoned the area. Ranchers, farmers, and prospectors later settled Moab in the neighboring riverine valley in the 1880s. Word of the beauty in the surrounding rock formations spread beyond the settlement as a possible tourist destination.
The Arches area was first brought to the attention of the National Park Service by Frank A. Wadleigh, passenger traffic manager of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad. Wadleigh, accompanied by railroad photographer George L. Beam, visited the area in September 1923 at the invitation of Alexander Ringhoffer, a Hungarian born prospector living in Salt Valley. Ringhoffer had written to the railroad in an effort to interest them in the tourist potential of a scenic area he had discovered the previous year with his two sons and a son in law, which he called the "Devil's Garden" (known today as the "Klondike Bluffs"). Wadleigh was impressed by what Ringhoffer showed him, and suggested to Park Service director Stephen T. Mather that the area be made a national monument.
The following year additional support for the monument idea came from Laurence M. Gould, a University of Michigan graduate student studying the geology of the nearby La Sal mountains, who was shown the scenic area by retired local physician Dr. J.W. "Doc" Williams.
left 250px thumb Landscape Arch
A succession of government investigators examined the area, in part due to confusion as to the precise location. In the process the name "Devil's Garden" was transposed to an area on the opposite side of Salt Valley, and Ringhoffer's original discovery was omitted, while another area nearby, known locally as "The Windows", was included. Designation of the area as a national monument was supported by the Park Service from 1926, but was resisted by President Calvin Coolidge's Interior Secretary. Finally in April 1929, shortly after his inauguration, President Herbert Hoover signed a presidential proclamation creating Arches National Monument, consisting of two comparatively small, disconnected sections. The purpose of the reservation under the 1906 Antiquities Act was to protect the arches, spires, balanced rocks, and other sandstone formations for their scientific and educational value. The name "Arches" was suggested by Frank Pinkely, superintendent of the Park Service's southwestern national monuments, following a visit to the Windows section in 1925.
In late 1938, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed a proclamation which enlarged the Arches to protect additional scenic features and permit development of facilities to promote tourism. A small adjustment was made by President Dwight Eisenhower in 1960 to accommodate a new road alignment.
In early 1969, just before leaving office, President Lyndon Johnson signed a proclamation substantially enlarging the Arches. Two years later President Richard Nixon signed legislation enacted by Congress which significantly reduced the area of Arches, but changed its status to a National Park.
Publicity
American writer Edward Abbey was a park ranger at Arches National Monument when he kept journals that became his book ''Desert Solitaire''. The success of this book, as well as the rise in adventure based recreation, has drawn many hikers, mountain bikers, and off road enthusiasts to the area, but activities are limited within park boundaries: camping, foot hiking (along designated trails), and driving only along marked roads.
The opening scenes of the movie ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'' were filmed at the park.
Reference
''The National Parks: Index 2001 2003''. Washington: U.S. Department of the Interior.
External links
Category:Archaeological sites in the United States
Category:Grand County, Utah
Category:National Parks of the United States
Category:Natural arches
Category:Utah landmarks
da:Arches Nationalpark
de:Arches Nationalpark
es:Parque Nacional Arches
fr:Arches National Park
pl:Park Narodowy Arches
An '''analog''' or '''analogue''' signal is any variable signal continuous in both time and amplitude. It differs from a digital signal in that small fluctuations in the signal are meaningful. Analog is usually thought of in an electrical context, however mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and other systems may also use analog signals.
The word "analog" implies an analogy between cause and effect, voltage in and voltage out, current in and current out, sound in and frequency out.
An analog signal uses some property of the medium to convey the signal's information. For example, an aneroid barometer uses rotary position as the signal to convey pressure information. Electrically, the property most commonly used is voltage followed closely by frequency, current, and charge.
Any information may be conveyed by an analog signal, often such a signal is a measured response to changes in physical phenomena, such as sound, light, temperature, position, or pressure, and is achieved using a transducer.
For example, in an analog sound recording, the variation in pressure of a sound striking a microphone creates a corresponding variation in the voltage amplitude of a current passing through it. An increase in the volume of the sound causes the fluctuation of the current's voltage amplitude to increase while keeping the same rhythm.
The primary disadvantage of analog signalling is that any system has noisethat is, random variationsin it. As the signal is copied and re copied, or transmitted over long distances, these random variations become dominant. Electrically these losses are lessened by shielding, good connections, and several cable types such as coax and twisted pair.
The effects of noise make signal loss and distortion impossible to recover, since amplifying the signal to recover attenuated parts of the signal amplifies the noise as well.
Another method of conveying an analog signal is to use modulation. In this, some base signal (e.g., a sinusoidal carrier wave) has one of its properties modulated: amplitude modulation involves altering the amplitude of a sinusoidal voltage waveform by the source information, frequency modulation changes the frequency. Other techniques, such as changing the phase of the base signal also work.
Analog circuits do not involve quantisation of information into digital format. The concept being measured over the circuit, whether sound, light, pressure, temperature, or an exceeded limit, remains from end to end.
Clocks with hands are called analog those that display digits are called digital. However, many analog clocks are actually digital since the hands do not move in a smooth continuous motion, but in small steps every second or half a second, or every minute with a loud CLUNK.
See digital for a discussion of ''digital vs. analog''.
Sources: Some of an earlier version of this article was originally taken from Federal Standard 1037C in support of MIL STD 188.
See also
Analog computer
Analog to digital converter
Digital to analog converter
Analog television
Analog synthesizer
Analog photocopier
Analog fax machine
Category:Sound
Category:Electronic design
da:Analog
de:Analogsignal
es:Se al anal gica
eo:Analoga
fr:Analogique
ko:
it:Analogico
nl:Analoog
ja:
pt:Sinal anal gico
ru:
fi:Analoginen
zh:
, June Duprez and Walter Huston.
'''''And Then There Were None''''' (also known as '''''Ten Little Indians''''' and originally as '''''Ten Little Niggers''''') is a detective novel by Agatha Christie first published in 1939.
Plot
The story focuses on ten strangers who are all (but one) brought, by misleading information, to an island off the coast of Devon, in southern England.
The characters are:
Vera Claythorne, a young teacher in a third class school
Philip Lombard, a down on his luck explorer mercenary
William Blore, a retired police inspector, now a private investigator
Dr. Edward Armstrong, a private physician
Justice Lawrence Wargrave, a bitter, cynical retired judge
Emily Brent, an elderly spinster and a religious zealot of extreme proportions
Rogers, the butler
General Macarthur, a lonely, retired army man
Mrs. Rogers, the housekeeper, Rogers' wife
Anthony Marston, a reckless playboy
On their first night, the ten realize that they have been brought to the island under false pretenses, but now have no means of getting away. A mysterious gramophone recording informs them that all ten of them are guilty of "murders," though in this case the killings cannot be dealt with by law.
On the first night, Anthony Marston dies of posioning. In the morning, Mrs. Rogers fails to wake up and it is determined that she probably had a fatal overdose of sleeping drugs. At lunch the next day, General Macarthur is found dead by a blow to the back of his head. After searching the island for the murderer or possible hiding spots, the survivors realize that the murderer can only be one of them, and whoever it is, is playing a game killing them in manners poetically similar to a nursery rhyme, and also removing one of ten little figurines in the dining room after each death. The survivors have a meeting and discover that none of them have an alibi for any of the deaths.
The next morning Rogers is found dead in the woodshed, having been killed with a giant axe that was nearby. Later that day, Emily Brent dies from an injection of potassium cyanide. The five remaining Dr. Armstrong, Justice Wargrave, Philip Lombard, Vera Claythorne, and Inspector Blore become increasingly paranoid. Later, Justice Wargrave is found dead, having been shot through the head. That night, Dr. Armostrong leaves the house, and when the rest of the survivors search for him they cannot find him.
Vera, Inspector Blore, and Philip Lombard go outside. Blore decides to go back to the house to get some sustinance, and a dull thud is heard. When Vera and Philip check to see what happened, they find Blore crushed to death by a heavy marble clock. They assume Doctor Armstrong did it and decide to stay out of the house. The two survivors get back to the beach only to find Armstrong's body washed up on the shore. Vera and Lombard they realise that they are the only two left. Even though they could not possibly have mudered the Inspector, the never ending suspicion has driven them to a breaking point and they assume each other as the murderers. Philip Lombard reaches for he revolver, only to discover that Vera Claythorne pickpoketed it. She shoots him and then returns to the house, thinking she is finally safe. When Vera gets to her room, she discovers a noose hanging there, and having been finally driven crazy by the entire experience, she hangs herself, thus fullfilling the rhyme upon which the murders were based.
So, by the novel's end, all ten guests are dead, leaving a "locked room mystery." A police investigation, though thorough, cannot find any satisfactory explanation. It is resolved when a letter in a bottle, tossed into the ocean and recovered by a trawler, is delivered to the police, which was written by the murderer.
Film and Theater
Christie had been disappointed in previous adaptations of her novels. As she had written a play before, she decided to adapt her own book herself. She decided that the staging of a play required the survival of two characters in order to carry the plot exposition. Consequently the resolution of the play is very different from that of the book (though the identity of the killer remains the same). This stage version dates from 1943. All but one of the films followed the play's humourous tone ending, rather than the book's dark tone and downbeat resolution.
The story was adapted for the cinema as ''And Then There Were None'' in 1945 and again in 1974 and also filmed as ''Ten Little Indians'' in 1959 (as truncated television recording of the play), 1965, 1974, 1989 and as ''Ten Little Niggers'' in 1987. The 1945 1987 film versions were the most successful and took fewer liberties with Christie's plot than some of the other versions. The 1945 film was directed by Rene Clair from a screenplay by Dudley Nichols. The 1987 film was written, produced and directed by renowed Russian filmmaker, Stanislav Govorukhin.
The 1987 version was an extremely faithful to the novel film adaptation made in Russia, the title of which (''"Desyat Negrityat"'') translates directly to the novel's original title, ''Ten Little Niggers'' (since the novel's title was never altered in most of the world outside of United States and United Kingdom.) The Russian version is the only adaptation that didn't change any of the characters or the ending of the book. It is most famous in Russia for having a legendary ensemble cast of the most famous and talented actors in Russia. Arguably, the Russian production is even more star studded than any of the Hollywood versions.
These film versions usually feature all star casts and are set in different locations, such as the Austrian Alps, the Iranian desert, and the African jungle. The only ones to keep the island as the location were the 1945 and the 1987 versions.
The basic concept of the plot has been recycled countless times, often without crediting Christie (who herself recycled numerous story concepts.) The most recent example is probably the 2004 crime thriller ''Mindhunters'', which includes many elements of Christie's original story, including an island and various plot twists.
In 2005 a new version of ''And Then There Were None'' was performed in London's West End. Written by Kevin Elyot and directed by Steven Pimlott, it is based on the novel rather than on Christie's drama.
List of movie adaptations
''And Then There Were None (1945 film)'' directed by Ren Clair ()
''Ten Little Indians (1959 film)'' live television presentation, directed by Paul Bogart, Philip F. Falcone, Leo Farrenkopf and Dan Zampino ()
''Ten Little Indians (1965 film)'' directed by George Pollock ()
''And Then There Were None (1974 film)'' directed by Peter Collinson ()
''Desyat negrityat'' (1987) directed by Stanislav Govorukhin ()
''Ten Little Indians (1989 film)'' directed by Alan Birkinshaw ()
The rhyme
The book's original title "Ten Little Niggers" was taken from the chorus of an American comic song, written by Septimus Winner in 1868 there are many variants of the lyrics, of which "Ten Little Injuns" is probably the most familiar to modern audiences. The song is now considered by many to be racist and offensive.
The rhyme used in the novel is as follows:
! This needs transwiki ing to wikisource
:Ten little Indian boys going out to dine
::One choked his little self and then there were nine.
:Nine little Indian boys sat up very late
::One overslept himself and then there were eight.
:Eight little Indian boys traveling in Devon
::One said he'd stay and then there were seven.
:Seven little Indian boys chopping up sticks
::One chopped himself into halves and then there were six.
:Six little Indian boys playing with a hive
::A bumblebee stung one and then there were five.
:Five little Indian boys going in for law
::One got in Chancery and then there were four.
:Four little Indian boys going out to sea
::A red herring swallowed one and then there were three.
:Three little Indian boys walking in the zoo
::A big bear hugged one and then there were two.
:Two little Indian boys sitting in the sun
::One got frizzled up and then there was one.
:One little Indian boy left all alone
::He went and hanged himself and then there were none.
Ten Little Indians and 'and then there was one' in Popular Culture
The memes 'Ten Little Indians' and 'and then there was one' have been used many times in modern days to refer to situations in stories oftentimes slasher films, other horror films, and disaster films in which the characters die off one by one. This is how many films of those genres are structured, in order to provide gory scenes periodically, and to ultimately force the main character to face off against the villain alone. This main character in slasher films is often the 'Final Girl.'
Trivia
"And Then There Were None" was adapted from Agatha Christie's book into a video game in 2005 by The Adventure Company. It was released in November of that year to mixed reviews, most of the slack going to changing the "Indians" to "Sailors," in a case of political correctness gone awry, and altering the killer's motive identity, though it is possible to see the original novel's ending when one finishes a puzzle after completing the main game. Four further books are to be adapted.
"Ten Little Indians" is a song by The Yardbirds along the same lines with the rhyme, although more dismal. In the song, the death of each "Indian" is related to breaking one of the Ten Commandments.
A Japanese doujin game, Embodiment of Scarlet Devil, features an extra stage of a girl having the spell card named "And Then Will There be None?", and a theme music named "Is she the U.N.Owen?". (U.N.Owen is the killer's alias used in the novel, play, and films.)
"Zehn Kleine J germeister" (Ten Little "J germeister") is a song by the German band Die Toten Hosen, along the same lines as the rhyme, but with funny or satirical things happening to the characters (taking drugs, being arrested for tax evasion, dying of Mad Cow Disease etc)
Polish 2003 film Show, starring Cezary Pazura, tells the story of a reality show located on a remote island. Suddenly, the competitors start to die one after another. One of the competitors even mention Agatha Christies' novel.
Category:1939 books
Category:Agatha Christie novels
fr:Dix petits n gres
pl:Dziesi ciu ma ych Murzynk w
pt:And Then There Were None
fi:Kymmenen pient neekeripoikaa
sv:Tio sm negerpojkar
as Poirot
'''Hercule Poirot''' (pronounced ) is a fictional character, the primary detective of Agatha Christie's novels. He appears in over 30 novels and over 50 short stories and is probably one of the most famous characters ever made.
The character was born in Spa, Belgium, and has worked as a Belgian police officer, notably in Brussels, but moved to England during World War I and started a second career as a private detective. Poirot is remarkable for his small stature and egg shaped head, his cat like green eyes, his meticulous moustache, his dandified dressing habits, his absolute obsession with order and neatness, and his disdain for detective methods that include crawling on hands and knees and looking for clues. He prefers to examine the psychology of a crime to discover more evidence, once even betting his best friend and sometime partner, Arthur Hastings, that he could solve a case simply by sitting in an easy chair and using his "little grey cells."
Like a large number of detectives of the early days of mystery fiction (including Miss Marple, Sherlock Holmes, and Father Brown), Poirot is unmarried. The love of his life, Countess Vera Rossakoff, appears in the short stories "The Double Clue" and "The Capture of Cerberus" and the novel ''The Big Four''.
His fictional address (from his business card) is 56B Whitehaven Mansions,
Sandhurst Square, London W1. The building used in the series can be found on Charterhouse Square City of London.
Major novels
The Poirot books take readers through the whole of his life in England, from the first book (''The Mysterious Affair at Styles''), where he is a refugee staying at Styles, to the last Poirot book (''Curtain''), where he visits Styles once again before his death. In between, Poirot solves cases outside England as well, including his most famous case, ''Murder on the Orient Express'' (1934).
Hercule Poirot became famous with the publication, in 1926, of ''The Murder of Roger Ackroyd'', whose surprising solution proved controversial. The novel is still among the most famous of all detective novels: Edmund Wilson alludes to it in the title of his well known attack on detective fiction, "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?" Aside from ''Roger Ackroyd'', the most critically acclaimed Poirot novels appeared from 1932 to 1942, including such acknowledged classics as ''Murder on the Orient Express'', ''The ABC Murders'' (1935), ''Cards on the Table'' (1936), and ''Death on the Nile'' (1937). The last of these, a tale of multiple homicide upon a Nile steamer, was judged by the celebrated detective novelist John Dickson Carr to be among the ten greatest mystery novels of all time.
The 1942 novel ''Five Little Pigs'' (aka ''Murder in Retrospect''), in which Poirot investigates a murder committed sixteen years before by analyzing various accounts of the tragedy, is a ''Rashomon'' like performance that critic and mystery novelist Robert Barnard called the best of the Christie novels.
Recurring characters
While the majority of the supporting cast in the Poirot stories is always different, some characters do show up more often. Arthur Hastings, whom Poirot met almost immediately after arriving in England, becomes his life long partner and appears in many of the novels and stories. Other frequently recurring characters include the detective novelist Ariadne Oliver, Agatha Christie's humorous self caricature, and Poirot's secretary, Miss Lemon. Chief Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard appears in many of the stories, as well. The mysterious Russian Countess Vera Rossakoff, Poirot's only known love interest, appears in three stories.
Books featuring Hercule Poirot
''Short story collections listed as ss''
''The Mysterious Affair at Styles'' (1920)
''Murder on the Links'' (1923)
''Poirot Investigates'' (1924, ''ss'')
''The Murder of Roger Ackroyd'' (1926)
''The Big Four'' (1927)
''The Mystery of the Blue Train'' (1928)
''Peril at End House'' (1932)
''Lord Edgware Dies'' (1933)
''Murder on the Orient Express'' (1934)
''Three Act Tragedy'' (1935)
''Death in the Clouds'' (1935)
''The A.B.C. Murders'' (1936)
''Cards on the Table'' (1936)
''Murder in Mesopotamia'' (1936)
''Death on the Nile'' (1937)
''Dumb Witness'' (1937)
''Murder in the Mews'' (1937, ''ss'')
''Appointment with Death'' (1938)
''Hercule Poirot's Christmas'' (1939)
''One, Two, Buckle My Shoe'' (1940)
''Sad Cypress'' (1940)
''Evil Under the Sun'' (1941)
''Five Little Pigs'' (1942)
''The Hollow'' (1946)
''The Labours of Hercules'' (1947)
''Taken at the Flood'' (1948) also published as ''There Is a Tide''
''Mrs McGinty's Dead'' (1952)
''After the Funeral'' (1953) also published as ''Funerals are Fatal''
''Hickory Dickory Dock'' (1955)
''Dead Man's Folly'' (1956)
''Cat Among the Pigeons'' (1959)
''The Clocks'' (1963)
''Third Girl'' (1966)
''Hallowe'en Party'' (1969)
''Elephants Can Remember'' (1972)
''Poirot's Early Cases'' (1974, ss)
''Curtain'' (written about 1940, published 1975)
Hercule Poirot on screen and stage
as Poirot
Hercule Poirot has been played by several actors. The character first appeared onscreen in 1931, played by Austin Trevor. Perhaps the most notable portrayals have been by Albert Finney in the cinematic version of ''Murder on the Orient Express'', and David Suchet in a long series of television productions. The role has also been played more than once by Peter Ustinov and by Tony Randall, Ian Holm, and Alfred Molina.
In 2004, NHK (a Japanese TV network) produced a 39 episode anime series titled ''Agatha Christie's Famous Detectives Poirot and Marple (Agatha Christie no Meitantei Poirot to Marple)'', as well as a manga series by the same title released starting in 2005. The series ran from July 4, 2004 through May 15, 2005, and is now being shown as reruns on NHK and other networks in Japan. Poirot was voiced by K tar Satomi (Satomi K tar ) and Miss Marple was voiced by Kaoru Yachigusa (Yachigusa Kaoru).
Poirot, Hercule
Poirot, Hercule
Poirot, Hercule
cs:Hercule Poirot
da:Hercule Poirot
de:Hercule Poirot
eo:Hercule POIROT
fa:
fr:Hercule Poirot
id:Hercule Poirot
it:Hercule Poirot
he:
nl:Hercule Poirot
ja:
pl:Herkules Poirot
pt:Hercule Poirot
ru:
fi:Hercule Poirot
sv:Hercule Poirot
zh:
as '''Miss Marple'''
'''Jane Marple''', usually known as '''Miss Marple''', is a fictional character appearing in many Agatha Christie novels.
She lives in the little village of St. Mary Mead. She looks like an ordinary spinster, in tweed and with a curiosity as wide as the world, but when it comes to solving mysteries, she turns out to have a sharp logical mind. In the best detective story tradition, she often embarrasses the local "professional" police, usually by making an analogy with some village occurrence or character.
Personality
When we first meet Jane Marple she is very much the stereotypical spinster of the last century blue eyed and frail, wearing a black lace cap and mittens, and constantly knitting. She is also a gleeful gossip and not especially nice. The first Marple novel, ''The Murder at the Vicarage'' sees a markedly different Marple to the one who would appear in later books, as she modernized and became nicer over the years.
Miss Marple's nephew, the "well known author" Raymond West and his wife Joan (who first appeared as Joyce), a modern artist, were introduced in 1933 in ''The Thirteen Problems''. Raymond, in particular, is overconfident of himself and dismissive of Miss Marple's mental powers, though she continually upstages him in the end.
''A Murder is Announced'' (1950), Agatha Christie's fiftieth novel, is regarded by some as the best Miss Marple novel, and one of the best of Christie's whodunits.
Miss Marple is able to solve difficult crimes not only because of her shrewd intelligence, but because St. Mary Mead, over her lifetime, has put on a pageant of human depravity rivaled only by that of Sodom and Gomorrah. No crime can arise without reminding Miss Marple of some parallel incident in the history of her time.
As with her other famous detective Hercule Poirot, Christie wrote a concluding novel to her Marple series, ''Sleeping Murder'', in 1940 and saved it for her old age, causing some embarrassing discrepancies as people who were written off as dead (such as Dolly Bantry's husband, Colonel Arthur Bantry) by the time her mystery "Nemesis" was published, which was the preceding Marple mystery '''but actually the last one written''', appear alive in ''Sleeping Murder'' having been resurrected from the fictional dead. ''Sleeping Murder'' was published in 1976, shortly after Christie's death, and was the last of her novels to be published, although, again, it was written in 1940.
Books featuring Miss Marple
''The Murder at the Vicarage'' (1930)
''The Body in the Library'' (1942)
''The Moving Finger'' (1943)
''A Murder is Announced'' (1950)
''They Do It with Mirrors, or Murder With Mirrors'' (1952)
''A Pocket Full of Rye'' (1953)
''4.50 from Paddington, or What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!'' (1957)
''The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side'' (1962)
''A Caribbean Mystery'' (1964)
''At Bertram's Hotel'' (1965)
''Nemesis'' (1971)
''Sleeping Murder'' (written around 1940, published 1976)
Quotation
"The young people think the old people are fools, but the old people ''know'' the young people are fools" Miss Marple's motto, in several of the books and stories.
Movies
as '''Miss Marple'''
Although popular from her first appearance in 1930, Jane Marple had to wait thirty two years for her first big screen appearance when she made it, the results were disappointing to both Christie purists and Christie herself. ''Murder, She Said'' (1962, directed by George Pollock) was the first of four British MGM productions starring Dame Margaret Rutherford, a magnificent comic actress but too boisterous and loud for the prim and birdlike character Christie created. This first film was based on the 1957 novel ''4:50 from Paddington'' (U.S. title, ''What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!''), and the changes made in the plot were typical of the series. In the film, Mrs. McGillicuddy doesn't see anything because there is no Mrs. McGillicuddy. Miss Marple herself sees apparent murder committed on a train passing hers. Likewise, it is Miss Marple herself who poses as a maid to find out the facts of the case, not a young friend of hers who has made a business of it.
The other Rutherford films (all directed by George Pollock) were ''Murder at the Gallop'' (1963), based on the 1953 Hercule Poirot novel ''After the Funeral'' ''Murder Most Foul'' (1964), based on the 1952 Poirot novel ''Mrs McGinty's Dead'' and ''Murder Ahoy'' (1964), not based on any Christie work.
In 1980, Angela Lansbury played Miss Marple in ''The Mirror Crack'd'' (EMI, directed by Guy Hamilton), based on Christie's 1962 novel. However, Lansbury is only on screen for a short time, the bulk of the film being taken up with the machinations of an all star cast that included Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson, Geraldine Chaplin, Tony Curtis, and Kim Novak. Edward Fox appeared as Inspector Craddock, who did Miss Marple's legwork.
American stage and screen legend Helen Hayes portrayed Miss Marple in two American made for TV movies, both for CBS: ''A Caribbean Mystery'' (1983) and ''Murder with Mirrors'' (1984). Sue Grafton contributed to the screenplay of the former. Hayes's Marple was benign and chirpy.
Television and Radio
American TV was the setting for the first dramatic portrayal of Miss Marple. Gracie Fields, a legendary British actress, played the geriatric sleuth in a 1956 episode of ''Goodyear TV Playhouse'' based on ''A Murder Is Announced'', the 1950 Christie novel.
There was a long running and popular BBC TV series in the 1980s with Joan Hickson, an octogenarian herself, who had appeared in a small role in the Rutherford film ''Murder, She Said''. The consensus among Christie devotees was that hers was the definitive performance. All twelve Miss Marple novels were dramatized: ''The Body in the Library'' ''The Moving Finger'' ''A Murder Is Announced'' ''A Pocket Full of Rye'' ''Murder at the Vicarage'' ''Sleeping Murder'' ''At Bertram's Hotel'' ''Nemesis'' ''4:50 from Paddington'' ''A Caribbean Mystery'' ''They Do It with Mirrors'' and ''The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side''. All these serializations were shown in the United States on the PBS '''' series. It was also televised in Germany. The television show followed the plots of the books considerably more closely than did the Rutherford films.
BBC Radio 4 also dramatised several of the books with June Whitfield as Miss Marple.
Angela Lansbury, after playing Miss Marple in ''The Mirror Crack'd'', went on to star in the TV series ''Murder, She Wrote'' as Jessica Fletcher, a novelist who solves crimes. The character was to some degree based on Miss Marple and another Christie character, Ariadne Oliver.
In 2004, Granada Television, in collaboration with Agatha Christie Limited, produced four adaptations (namely ''The Body in the Library'', ''Murder in the Vicarage'', ''4.50 from Paddington'' and ''A Murder is Announced'') starring Geraldine McEwan in the title role, and also featuring Joanna Lumley, Ian Richardson, Zoe Wanamaker, Miriam Margolyes, Janet McTeer, Derek Jacobi, Claire Skinner and Stephen Tompkinson in supporting roles. In 2005 and 2006, four more mysteries are being made...but two of them aren't even Miss Marple books! They are Sleeping Murder, The Moving Finger, By the Pricking of My Thumbs (novel), and The Sittaford Mystery.
In 2004, NHK (a Japanese TV network) produced a 39 episode anime series titled ''Agatha Christie's Famous Detectives Poirot and Marple ( , Agasa Kurisutii no Meitantei Powaro to Maapuru)'', as well as a manga series by the same title released starting in 2005. The series ran from July 4, 2004 through May 15, 2005, and is now being shown as reruns on NHK and other networks in Japan. Poirot was voiced by K tar Satomi ( , Satomi K tar ) and Miss Marple was voiced by Kaoru Yachigusa ( , Yachigusa Kaoru).
External links
Marple, Miss
Category:Crime television series! until we get a separate article on the TV series
Category:BBC television programmes
Category:Television programs based on novels
Category:Series of books
Category:English cultural icons
Category:Agatha Christie
da:Miss Marple
de:Miss Marple
eo:Miss MARPLE
fr:Miss Marple
id:Miss Marple
it:Miss Marple
hu:Miss Marple
nl:Miss Marple
ja:
pl:Jane Marple
pt:Miss Marple
sl:Miss Marple
sv:Miss Marple
zh:
'''April''' is the fourth month of the year in the Gregorian Calendar and one of four with the length of 30 days.
April begins (astrologically) with the sun in the sign of Aries and ends in the sign of Taurus. Astronomically speaking, the sun begins in the constellation of Pisces and ends in the constellation of Aries.
The derivation of the name (Latin ''aprillis'') is uncertain. The traditional etymology from the Latin ''aperire'', "to open," in allusion to its being the season when trees and flowers begin to "open," is supported by comparison with the modern Greek use of (opening) for spring. Since all the Roman months were named in honour of divinities, and as April was sacred to Venus, the ''Festum Veneris et Fortunae Virilis'' being held on the first day, it has been suggested that Aprilis was originally her month Aphrilis, from her Greek name Aphrodite, or from the Etruscan name ''Apru''. Jacob Grimm suggests the name of a hypothetical god or hero, ''Aper'' or ''Aprus''
The Anglo Saxons called April ''Oster monath'' or ''Eostur monath'', the period sacred to ''Eostre'' or ''Ostara'', the pagan Saxon goddess of spring, from whose name is derived the modern Easter. St George's day is the twenty third of the month and St Mark's Eve, with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church, falls on the twenty fourth. In China the symbolical ploughing of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood takes place in their third month, which frequently corresponds to our April and in Japan the feast of Dolls is celebrated in the same month.
The "days of April" (''journ es d'avril'') is a name appropriated in French history to a series of insurrections at Lyons, Paris and elsewhere, against the government of Louis Philippe in 1834, which led to violent repressive measures, and to a famous trial known as the ''proc s d'avrill''.
April was originally the second month of the Roman calendar and had 29 days. Julius Caesar's calendar reform in 45 BCE resulted in April having 30 days and becoming the fourth month, as the year now began in January.
The tragic month of April
Wars that started ended in April include
American Revolution Started (Paul Revere's Ride: April 18 19 1775)
American Civil War (Started April 1861, Ended April 1865, thus "Across 5 Aprils")
The Bosnian War began in the first days April 1992
The Rwandan Genocide began in April 1994
Other Tragedies that have occurred in the month of April include
President Abraham Lincoln's Assassination (April 14 1865)
1906 San Francisco Earthquake (April 18 1906)
The sinking of the RMS ''Titanic'' (April 14 15,1912)
The Armenian Genocide (April 24 1915)
Martin Luther King Jr. Assassinated (April 4 1968)
Super Tornado Outbreak (April 3 4, 1974)
Chernobyl nuclear accident (April 26 1986)
The bloody end to the Branch Dividan siege in Waco, Texas (April 19 1993)
The Oklahoma City Bombing (April 19 1995)
In Lebanon, 102 Lebanese civilians are killed when the Israel Defense Forces shell the UN compound at Qana (see Qana Massacre). (April 18 1996)
Columbine High School shooting (April 20 1999)
Trivia
April begins on the same day of week as July in all years and also January in leap years.
April's flower is the daisy and sweet pea.
April's birthstone is the diamond.
April in the Northern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent to October in the Southern Hemisphere and vise versa.
Events in Aprils
Monthlong events in April
Chocolate Eaters Month
Poetry Month
Cancer Control Month
Marcus H. Birthday (National Holiday in Australia)
Child Abuse Prevention Month
International Guitar Month
Mathematics Education Month
National Humor Month
National Welding Month
National Smile Month
National Pecan Month
VD Awareness Month
Stress Awareness Month
Alcohol Awareness Month
Autism Awareness Month
Keep America Beautiful Month
Weeklong events in April
1st Week in April
Medic Alert Week
Cherry Blossom Festival
Publicity Stunt Week
National Birthparents Week
Week of the Young Child
Straw Hat Week
National Bake Week (begins 1st Mon)
Consider Christianity Week
National Reading a Road Map Week
2nd Week in April
Be Kind to Animals Week
Masters Golf Tournament
National Medical Laboratory Week
Private Property Week (10th 16th)
National Library Week
Harmony Week
National Garden Week
TV Turn Off Week
National Guitar Week
National Building Safety Week
National Home Safety Week
3rd Week in April
National Police Week
Boys and Girls Club Week
National Coin Week
Bike Safety Week
National Bubblegum Week
Pan American Week
National Week of the Ocean
National Crime Victims Rights Week
National Volunteer Week
National Adult Films Week
Last Week in April
Forest Week
National Lingerie Week
Canada US Goodwill Week
Big Brothers Sisters Appreciation Week
Consumer Protection Week
National TV Free Week
Jewish Heritage Week
Keep America Beautiful Week
National YMCA Week
Professional Secretaries Week
Intergenerational Week
Reading Is Fun Week
Egg Salad Week
Teacher Appreciation Week (begins Last Mon)
A Week in April
Astronomy Week (determined by 1st Quarter Moon)
April movable daily holidays
1st Sunday
Set Your Clock Forward Day (Daylight Saving Time begins in the United States turn your clock ahead at 2:00 a.m.)
Budoha Day (Hawaii)
Vesak (Buddha's Birthday)
1st Saturday
Saturday Market Day (Oregon)
1st Saturday before 5th
Tax Saturday (UK)
1st Thursday
Glarus Festival (Switzerland)
1st Friday
Student Government Day (Massachusetts)
Friday after 1st
Arbor Day (Apache, Navajo, Coconino, Mohave, Yavapai Arizona)
2nd Friday
Audubon Day
3rd Sunday Monday
Sechselauten (Six Ringing Festival Switzerland)
3rd Monday
Patriot's Day (Maine, Massachusetts)
Boston Marathon
Thursday between 19th 26th
First Day of Summer (Iceland)
Saturday nearest St. George's Day (23rd)
Peppercorn Day (Bermuda)
Monday nearest Feast Day of St. George (23rd)
St. George's Day (Newfoundland)
Sunday after 1st full moon after vernal equinox following Passover
Lambri (Bright Day Greece)
3rd Monday
Patriots' Day (Maine, Massachusetts)
4th Monday
Fast Day (New Hampshire)
4th Thursday
Take Our Daughters (and Sons) to Work Day
4th Weekend
Just Pray No weekend
Last Monday
Confederate Memorial Day (Alabama, Mississippi)
Last Friday
Arbor Day
Bird Day
Wednesday of Last Full Week
Administrative Professionals Day
Last Saturday
National Sense of Smell Day (USA)
April Indeterminate Holidays
Full Moon Day of 6th Buddhist month ( Apr May)
Vesak
Sun enters Aries
Solar New Year (Southeast Asia)
aka Thingyan (Burma)
aka Songkran (Thailand)
10th through 15th Day of 2nd lunar month
Paro Tsechu (Bhutan)
During planting season ( Apr May)
Tyi Wara (Mali)
Early April to late July (every 4 years)
Summer Olympics begin
Late April or May
Alp Aufzug (Switzerland)
Before 1st rainfall ( Apr May)
Bobo Masquerade (Burkina Faso)
Sometime in April
World Championship Cow Chip Throwing Contest
Palm Sunday Christian
Palm Sunday Armenian Christian
Good Friday Christian
Easter Christian
Pesach (Passover) Jewish
Other special days
April Fools' Day (April 1)
See also
List of historical anniversaries
April Fools' Day
References
Chambers's ''Book of Days''
Grimm's ''Geschichte der deutschen Sprache''. Cap. "Monate"
Category:Months
af:April
an:Abril
ang: asterm na
ar:
ast:Abril
be:
bg:
br:Ebrel
bs:April
ca:Abril
cs:Duben
csb: kwi t
cv:
cy:Ebrill
da:April
de:April
el:
eo:Aprilo
es:Abril
et:Aprill
eu:Apiril
fa:
fi:Huhtikuu
fo:Apr l
fr:Avril
fur:Avr l
fy:April
ga:Aibre n
gl:Abril
he:
hr:Travanj
hu: prilis
ia:April
id:April
ie:April
ilo:Abril
io:Aprilo
is:Apr l
it:Aprile
ja:4
jv:April
ka:
kn:
ko:4
ku:Avr l
kw:Mys Ebrel
la:Aprilis
lb:Abr ll
li:April
lt:Balandis
lv:Apr lis
mi:Paenga wh wh
mr:
ms:April
nap:Abbrile
nl:April
nn:April
no:April
oc:Abril
pl:Kwiecie
pt:Abril
ro:Aprilie
ru:
scn:Aprili
sco:Aprile
se:Cuo om nnu
simple:April
sk:Apr l
sl:April
sq:Prilli
sr:
sv:April
ta:
th:
tl:Abril
tpi:Epril
tr:Nisan
tt: pril
uk:
ur:
vi:Th ng t
vo:Prilul
wa:Avri
zh:4
'''August''' is the eighth month of the year in the Gregorian Calendar and one of seven Gregorian months with the length of 31 days.
August begins (astrologically) with the sun in the sign of Leo and ends in the sign of Virgo. Astronomically speaking, the sun begins in the constellation of Cancer and ends in the constellation of Leo.
August was named in honor of Augustus. The month reputedly has 31 days because Augustus wanted as many days as Julius Caesar's July. Augustus placed the month where it is because that is when Cleopatra died. Before Augustus renamed August, it was called ''Sextilis'' in Latin, since it was the sixth month in the Roman calendar which started in March.
In the pagan wheel of the year August begins at or near Lughnasadh in the northern hemisphere and Imbolc in the southern hemisphere.
In Ireland, (in the Irish language) August is known as '''L nasa''', a modern rendition of Lughnasadh, named after the god Lugh and August 1, (L L nasa) in the Irish Calendar is still regarded as the first day of Autumn. The first Monday in August is one of the public holidays in the Republic of Ireland.
In the old Japanese calendar, the month is called ''hatsuki'' ().
In Finnish, the month is called ''elokuu'', meaning "month of reaping".
In the UK, August is generally when all academic exam results are published, especially for GCSEs and A Levels as well as other exams. Also, scholars and school workers such as teachers, have a holiday or non contact time, and there are two bank holidays (UK). It is typically when people go on holiday due to the availability of time.
During August 13 to 19, Philippines schools and theaters celebrate the National Week of the Filipino Language.
In Spain, August is the holiday month for most workers.
In Brazil, folk superstition associates bad luck to August, with the proverb ''"Agosto, o m s do desgosto"'' ("August, the month of misfortune") being often heard. This may come from the sinister memories of the St. Bartholomew's day (August 24), which is particularly dreaded in the Northeast of the country. August 24 is also, in the tradition of Candombl , the day of Eshu, one of the most malevolent deities. Coincidentally, some unfortunate polical events took place in August, like the suicide of the then President Get lio Vargas.
Every last Sunday of August, the Philippines celebrates National Heroes Day in commemoration of the First Cry of the Philippine Revolution on August 23, 1896.
August is also the name of a Japanese visual novel company.
Events Months in August
National Back To School Month
National Investors Month
Admit You're Happy Month
Women's Small Business Month
Trivia
'''August''' begins on the same day of the week as '''February''' in a leap year.
August's flower is the poppy.
August's birthstone is the peridot.
August contains no United States holiday.
August in the Northern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent to February in the Southern Hemisphere and vise versa.
Category:Months
af:Augustus
als:August
ang:W odm na
ar:
an:Agosto
ast:Agostu
bg:
be:
bs:August
br:Eost
ca:Agost
ceb:Agosto
cv:
cs:Srpen
cy:Awst
da:August
de:August
et:August
el:
es:Agosto
eo:A gusto
eu:Abuztu
fa:
fo:August
fr:Ao t
fy:Augustus
fur:Avost
ga:L nasa
gl:Agosto
ko:8
hr:Kolovoz
io:Agosto
id:Agustus
ia:Augusto
ie:August
is: g st
it:Agosto
he:
jv:Agustus
kn:
ka:
csb:Z lnik
kw:Mys Est
ku:Gelaw j (meh)
la:Augustus (mensis)
lv:Augusts
lt:Rugpj tis
lb:August
li:Augustus (maond)
hu:Augusztus
mi:Here turi k k
mr:
ms:Ogos
nap:A sto
nl:Augustus (maand)
ja:8
no:August
nn:August
oc:Agost
pl:Sierpie
pt:Agosto
ro:August
ru:
se:Borgem nnu
sco:August
sq:Gushti
scn:Austu
simple:August
sk:August
sl:Avgust
sr:
su:Agustus
fi:Elokuu
sv:Augusti
tl:Agosto
ta:
tt:August
th:
vi:Th ng t m
tpi:Ogas
tr:A ustos
uk:
ur:
vo:Gustul
wa:Awousse
zh:8
:''For other uses of the word Aaron, see Aaron (disambiguation).''
'''Aaron'''
('''''', a word meaning "bearer of martyrs" in Hebrew (perhaps also, or instead, related to the Egyptian "Aha Rw," "Warrior Lion"), Standard Hebrew '''Aharon''', Tiberian Hebrew '''Ahrn'''), was one of two brothers who play a unique part in the history of the Hebrew people. He was the elder son of Amram and Jochebed of the tribe of Levi Moses, the other son, being three years younger, and Miriam, their sister, several years older (Exodus 2:4 Exodus 6:16 ff. Numbers 33:39). Aaron was the great grandson of Levi (Exodus 6:16 20) and represented the priestly functions of his tribe. While Moses was receiving his education at the Egyptian court and during his exile among the Midianites, Aaron and his sister remained with their kinsmen in the eastern border land of Egypt. Here he gained a name for eloquent and persuasive speech so that when the time came for the demand upon Pharaoh to release Israel from captivity, Aaron became his brother s ''nabi '', or spokesman, to his own people (Exodus 4:16) and, after their unwillingness to hear, to Pharaoh himself (Exodus 7:9).
His function
Aaron s function included the duties of speaker and implied personal dealings with the court on behalf of Moses, who was always the central moving figure. The part played by Aaron in the events that preceded the Exodus was, therefore, ministerial, and not directive. He, along with Moses, performed signs before his people which impressed them with a belief in the reality of the divine mission of the brothers (Exodus 4:15 16). At the command of Moses he stretched out his rod in order to bring on the first three plagues (Exodus 7:19, 8:1, 12). In the infliction of the remaining plagues he appears to have acted merely as the attendant of Moses, whose outstretched rod drew the divine wrath upon Pharaoh and his subjects (Exodus 9:23, 10:13, 22). The potency of Aaron s rod had already been demonstrated by its victory over the rods of the Egyptian magicians, which it swallowed after all the rods alike had been turned into serpents (Exodus 7:9 ''et seq.''). During the journey in the wilderness Aaron is not always prominent or active and he sometimes appears guilty of rebellious or treasonable conduct. At the battle with Amalek he is chosen with Hur to support the hand of Moses that held the rod of God (Exodus 17:9 ''et seq.''). When the revelation was given to Moses at Sinai, he headed the elders of Israel who accompanied Moses on the way to the summit. Joshua, however, was admitted with his leader to the very presence of the Lord, while Aaron and Hur remained below to look after the people (Exodus 24:9 14). It was during the prolonged absence of Moses that Aaron yielded to the clamors of the people, and made a golden calf as a visible image of the divinity who had delivered them from Egypt (Exodus 32:1 6). At the intercession of Moses, Aaron was saved from the plague which smote the people (Deuteronomy 9:20 Exodus 32:35), although it was to Aaron s tribe of Levi that the work of punitive vengeance was committed (Exodus 32:26 ''et seq.'').
Becomes priest of Israel
At the time when the tribe of Levi was set apart for the priestly service, Aaron was anointed and consecrated to the priesthood, arrayed in the robes of his office, and instructed in its manifold duties (Exodus 28 and 29). On the very day of his consecration his sons, Nadav and Avihu, were consumed by fire from the Lord for having offered incense in an unlawful manner (Leviticus 10).
Rebellion of Korah
From the time of the sojourn at Sinai, where he became the anointed priest of Israel, Aaron ceased to be the minister of Moses, his place being taken by Joshua. He is mentioned in association with Miriam in a jealous complaint against the exclusive claims of Moses as the Lord s prophet. The presumption of the murmurers was rebuked, and Miriam was smitten with ''tzara'as''. Aaron entreated Moses to intercede for her, at the same time confessing the sin and folly that prompted the uprising. Aaron himself was not struck with the plague on account of sacerdotal immunity and Miriam, after seven days quarantine, was healed and restored to favor (Numbers 12). It is noteworthy that the prophet Micah (6:4) mentions Moses, Aaron, and Miriam as the leaders of Israel after the Exodus (a judgment wholly in accord with the tenor of the narratives). In the present instance it is made clear by the express words of the oracle (Numbers 12:6 8) that Moses was unique among men as the one with whom the Lord spoke face to face. The failure to recognize or concede this prerogative of their brother was the sin of Miriam and Aaron. The validity of the exclusive priesthood of the family of Aaron was attested after the ill fated rebellion of Korah, who was a first cousin of Aaron. When the earth had opened and swallowed up the leaders of the insurgents (Numbers 16:25 35), Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was commissioned to take charge of the censers of the dead priests. And when the plague had broken out among the people who had sympathized with the rebels, Aaron, at the command of Moses, took his censer and stood between the living and the dead till the plague was stayed (Numbers 17:1 15, 16:36 50, Authorized Version). Another memorable transaction followed. Each of the tribal princes of Israel took a rod and wrote his name upon it, and the twelve rods were laid up over night in the tent of meeting. On the morrow Aaron s rod was found to have budded and blossomed and borne ripe almonds (Numbers 17:8 see Aaron s Rod). The miracle proved merely the prerogative of the tribe of Levi but now a formal distinction was made in perpetuity between the family of Aaron and the other Levites. While all the Levites (and only Levites) were to be devoted to sacred services, the special charge of the sanctuary and the altar was committed to the Aaronites alone (Numbers 18:1 7). The scene of this enactment is unknown, nor is the time mentioned.
Death
Aaron, like Moses, was not permitted to enter Canaan with the successful invaders. The reason alleged is that the two brothers showed impatience at Meribah (Kadesh) in the last year of the desert pilgrimage (Numbers 20:12, 13), when they, or rather Moses, brought water out of a rock to quench the thirst of the people. The action was construed as displaying a want of deference to the Lord, since they had been commanded to speak to the rock, whereas Moses struck it with the wonder working rod (Numbers 20:7 11). Of the death of Aaron we have two accounts. The principal one gives a detailed statement to the effect that, soon after the above incident, Aaron, with his son Eleazar and Moses, ascended Mount Hor. There Moses stripped him (Aaron) of his priestly garments, and transferred them to Eleazar. Aaron died on the summit of the mountain, and the people mourned for him thirty days (Numbers 20:22 29 compare 33:38, 39). The other account is found in Deuteronomy 10:6, where Moses is reported as saying that Aaron died at Mosera and was buried there. Some scholars think that Mosera is not on Mount Hor, since the itinerary in Numbers 33:31 37 records seven stages between Moseroth (Mosera) and Mount Hor.
Typical signification in apocryphal and rabbinical literature
The older prophets and prophetical writers beheld in their priests the representatives of a religious form inferior to the prophetic truth men without the spirit of God and lacking the will power requisite to resist the multitude in its idolatrous proclivities. Thus Aaron, the typical priest, ranks far below Moses: he is but his mouthpiece, and the executor of the will of God revealed through Moses, although it is pointed out (Sifra, Wa yi ra, 1) that it is said fifteen times in the Pentateuch that the Lord spoke to Moses ''and'' Aaron. Under the influence of the priesthood which shaped the destinies of the nation under Persian rule, a different ideal of the priest was formed, as is learned from Malachi 2:4 7 and the prevailing tendency was to place Aaron on a footing equal with Moses. At times Aaron, and at other times Moses, is mentioned first in Scripture this is to show that they were of equal rank, says Mekilta , 1 and Ecclesiasticus (Sirach), 44:6 24, expressly infers this when introducing in his record of renowned men the glowing description of Aaron s ministration.
Moses and Aaron compared
According to Tan uma (ed. Buber, 2:12), Aaron s activity as a prophet began earlier than that of Moses. The writer of the Testaments of the Patriarchs, however, hesitates to rank Moses the faithful, him that speaks with God as with a father, as equal with Aaron (Testament of Levi, 8:17). The rabbis are still more emphatic in their praise of Aaron s virtues. Thus Hillel, who in Herod s time saw before him mainly a degenerate class of priests, selfish and quarrelsome, held Aaron of old up as a mirror, saying: Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace love your fellow creatures and draw them nigh unto the Law! (Abot, 1:12). This is further illustrated by the tradition preserved in Abot de Rabbi Natan 12, Sanhedrin 6b, and elsewhere, according to which Aaron was an ideal priest of the people, far more beloved for his kindly ways than was Moses. While Moses was stern and uncompromising, brooking no wrong, Aaron went about as peacemaker, reconciling man and wife when he saw them estranged, or a man with his neighbor when they quarreled, and winning evil doers back into the right way by his friendly intercourse. The mourning of the people at Aaron s death was greater, therefore, than at that of Moses for whereas, when Aaron died the whole house of Israel wept, including the women (Numbers 20:29), Moses was bewailed by the sons of Israel only (Deuteronomy 34:8). Even in the making of the Golden Calf the rabbis find extenuating circumstances for Aaron (Sanhedrin 7a). His fortitude and silent submission to the will of God on the loss of his two sons are referred to as an excellent example to men how to glorify God in the midst of great affliction (Zeba im 115b Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 3:8, 7). Especially significant are the words represented as being spoken by God after the princes of the Twelve Tribes had brought their dedication offerings into the newly reared Tabernacle: Say to thy brother Aaron: Greater than the gifts of the princes is thy gift for thou art called upon to kindle the light, and, while the sacrifices shall last only as long as the Temple lasts, thy light of the Law shall last forever (Tan uma, ed. Buber, , 6).
Death of Aaron
In fulfillment of the promise of peaceful life, symbolized by the pouring of oil upon his head (Leviticus Rabbah 10, Midrash Tehilim 133:1), Aaron s death, as described in the Haggadah, was of a wonderful tranquillity. Accompanied by Moses, his brother, and by Eleazar, his son, Aaron went to the summit of Mount Hor, where the rock suddenly opened before him and a beautiful cave lit by a lamp presented itself to his view. Take off thy priestly raiment and place it upon thy son Eleazar! said Moses and then follow me. Aaron did as commanded and they entered the cave, where was prepared a bed around which angels stood. Go lie down upon thy bed, my brother, Moses continued and Aaron obeyed without a murmur. Then his soul departed as if by a kiss from God. The cave closed behind Moses as he left and he went down the hill with Eleazar, with garments rent, and crying: Alas, Aaron, my brother! thou, the pillar of supplication of Israel! When the Israelites cried in bewilderment, Where is Aaron? angels were seen carrying Aaron s bier through the air. A voice was then heard saying: The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found on his lips: he walked with me in righteousness, and brought many back from sin (Malachi 2:6, 7). He died, according to Seder Olam R. 9, Rosh ha Shanah 2, 3a, and Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 4:4, 7, on the first of Ab. Josephus says also that he died while the multitude looked upon him. The pillar of cloud which proceeded in front of Israel s camp disappeared at Aaron s death (see Seder Olam, 9 and Rosh ha Shanah 2b 3a). The seeming contradiction between Numbers 20:22 ''et seq.'' and Deuteronomy 10:6 is solved by the rabbis in the following manner: Aaron s death on Mount Hor was marked by the defeat of the people in a war with the king of Arad, in consequence of which the Israelites fled, marching seven stations backward to Mosera, where they performed the rites of mourning for Aaron wherefore it is said: There at Mosera died Aaron. See Mekilta, Beshalla , Wayassa , 1 Tan uma, Hu at, 18 Yerushalmi So ah, 1:17c, and Targum Yerushalmi Numbers and Deuteronomy on the above mentioned passages.
The rabbis also dwell with special laudation on the brotherly sentiment which united Aaron and Moses. When the latter was appointed ruler and Aaron high priest, neither betrayed any jealousy instead they rejoiced in one another s greatness. When Moses at first declined to go to Pharaoh, saying: O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send (Exodus 4:13), he was unwilling to deprive Aaron, his brother, of the high position the latter had held for so many years but the Lord reassured him, saying: Behold, when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart (Exodus 4:14). Indeed, Aaron was to find his reward, says Simon ben Yo ai for that heart which had leaped with joy over his younger brother s rise to glory greater than his was decorated with the Urim and Thummim, which were to be upon Aaron s heart when he goeth in before the Lord (Canticles Rabbah 1:10). Moses and Aaron met in gladness of heart, kissing each other as true brothers (Exodus 4:27 compare Song of Songs, 8:1), and of them it is written: Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! (Psalms 133:1). Of them it is said (Psalms 85:10): Mercy and truth are met together righteousness and peace have kissed each other for Moses stood for righteousness, according to Deuteronomy 33:21, and Aaron for peace, according to Malachi 2:6. Again, mercy was personified in Aaron, according to Deuteronomy 33:8, and truth in Moses, according to Numbers 12:7 (Tan uma, Shemot, ed. Buber, 24 26).
When Moses poured the oil of anointment upon the head of Aaron, Aaron modestly shrank back and said: Who knows whether I have not cast some blemish upon this sacred oil so as to forfeit this high office. Then the Holy Spirit spake the words: Behold the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard of Aaron, that even went down to the skirts of his garment, is as pure as the dew of Hermon (Psalms 133:2, 3, ''Heb''. Sifra, Shemini, Milluim Tan uma, Korah, ed. Buber, 14).
Genetics
Recently, the tradition that Kohanim are actually descended from Aaron was supported by genetic testing (Skorecki et al., 1997). Since all direct male lineage shares a common Y chromosome, testing was done across sectors of the Jewish population to see if there was any commonality between their Y chromosomes. There was proven to be certain distinctions among the Cohen modal haplotype, implying that the Kohanim do share some common ancestry. This information was used to support the claim of the Lemba (a sub Saharan tribe) that they were in fact, a tribe of Jews.
According to the documentary hypothesis
The Biblical representation of his character, negative and shadowy compared with Moses's, may be viewed in several ways. A clue to the seemingly contradictory delineations of Aaron (other than the obvious explanation that he is a complex character) is found in the framework of documentary analysis (see also ''Hexateuch''), which is accepted by some but not all scholars. According to those who accept the documentary hypothesis, the following portions of text belong to (1) E, (2) J, (3) D, and (4) P sources, respectively, with the fifth item being from ''Ezekiel''.
'''Aaron as fallible'''. These passages do not represent Aaron as a sacrosanct priest. He comes to meet Moses (''Exodus'' 4:14), supports him in war (Exodus 17:12) and jurisprudence (Exodus 24:14). He yields to the people and makes the calf (Exodus 32), and, with Miriam, criticises Moses for marrying a Cushite woman. Miriam is subsequently punished (''Numbers'' 12). He is present at the sacrificial covenant meal between Israel and the Kenites (Exodus 18:12). In this aspect, Joshua, instead of Aaron, serves in the Tent (Exodus 33:11).
'''Aaron as Moses's prophet'''. This representation concerns the covenant meal on Sinai (Exodus 24:1, 2, 9 11) and the vague charge that Aaron "let the people loose" (Exodus 32:25). Aaron seems to be an afterthought in the plague narrative (Exodus 8:25). In both this and the last view, Moses is the viceregent of God and Aaron is Moses' prophet (Exodus 4:16, 7:1).
'''Aaron as idolatrous'''. In ''Deuteronomy'' 9, Aaron is partly responsible for the building of the Golden Calf. The story says that Yahweh is so angry toward Aaron that he was about to destroy him. It appears that it is only Moses's intercessory prayer and his destruction of the Golden Calf which saves Aaron. The account of his death in Deuteromy 10:6 is different from that in Numbers 20:22. According to Deuteronomy it occurred at Moserah, seven stations from Mount Hor (Numbers 33:30), in the early months of the wandering because of the sign of the Golden Calf. The only other passage in reference to Aaron in Deuteronomy merely states that he is the brother of Moses (Deuteronomy 32:50).
'''Aaron as subordinate'''. The first three, simpler, plagues Aaron brings on at Moses' command thereafter Moses himself is the actor. In the narratives (Numbers 16, 17) it is Moses in each case who vindicates him. Aaron dies at Mount Hor in the fortieth year of the Exodus (Numbers 20:22, 33:38), because of rebellion at Meribah (cf. Deuteronomy as above).
'''Aaron as non priestly'''. In ''Leviticus'' 17 26, Aaron appears only in redactional passages connecting the Law of Holiness with its present context. In ''Ezekiel'' 40 48 Zadok, not Aaron, is the eponym of the priestly line (44:15, etc.).
In the Qur an
In the Qur'an he is known as Harun.
References
''Numbers Rabbah'' 9
''Leviticus Rabbah'' 10
''Midrash Pe irat Aharon'' in Jellinek s ''Bet ha Midrash'', 1:91 95
''Yal u Numbers'' 764
Baring Gould, ''Legends of Old Testament Characters''
''Chronicles of Jerahmeel'', ed. M. Gaster, pp. cx1:130 133
B. Beer, in Wertheimer s ''Jahrb.'', 1855
Hamburger, ''Der Geist der Haggada'', pp. 1 8
the same, ''Realencyklop die f r Bibel und Talmud'', s. v.
See also
Kohen
Y chromosomal Aaron
Documentary Hypothesis theories on the alternate meaning of Aaron's presence in the Torah.
Category:1597 BC births
Category:1474 BC deaths
Category:Torah people
ang:Aaron
ar:Aaaron
bg: ( )
ca:Aar
de:Aaron (biblische Person)
et:Aaron
eo:Aaron
fr:Aaron (personnage biblique)
gl:Ahar n
ia:Aaron
he:
nl:A ron
pl:Aaron (Biblia)
pt:Aar o
ru:
sv:Aron
! Language links at bottom
style "float:right "
'''April 4''' is the 94th day of the year in the Gregorian calendar (95th in leap years). There are 271 days remaining.
Events
1581 Francis Drake completes a circumnavigation of the world and is knighted by Elizabeth I.
1721 Sir Robert Walpole enters office as the first Prime Minister of the United Kingdom under King George I.
1812 U.S. President James Madison enacted a ninety day embargo on trade with the United Kingdom.
1814 Napoleon abdicates for the first time.
1818 The U.S. Congress adopts the flag of the United States as having 13 red and white stripes and one star for each state (20 stars) with additional stars to be added whenever a new state is added to the Union.
1841 President William Henry Harrison dies of pneumonia becoming the first President of the United States to die in office and at one month, the elected president with the shortest term served.
1850 Los Angeles, California is incorporated as a city.
1859 Bryant's Minstrels debut "Dixie" in New York City in the finale of a blackface minstrel show.
1865 American Civil War: A day after Union forces capture Richmond, Virginia, U.S. President Abraham Lincoln visits the Confederate capital.
1866 Alexander II of Russia narrowly escapes an assassination attempt in the city of Kiev. A design for a city gate to commemorate his escape was the inspiration for Mussorgsky's ''The Great Gate of Kiev'' from ''Pictures at an Exhibition''.
1887 Argonia, Kansas elects Susanna M. Salter as the first female mayor in the United States.
1905 In India, an earthquake near Kangra kills 370,000.
1918 World War I: Second Battle of the Somme ends.
1939 Faisal II becomes King of Iraq.
1945 World War II: American troops liberate Ohrdruf death camp in Germany.
1945 World War II: Soviet Army liberates Hungary.
1949 Twelve nations sign The North Atlantic Treaty creating the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
1964 The Beatles occupy all of the top five positions on the Billboard singles chart in the United States.
1968 Martin Luther King Jr. assassinated in Memphis.
1968 Apollo program: NASA launches Apollo 6.
1969 Dr. Denton Cooley implants the first temporary artificial heart.
1969 The ''Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour'' is cancelled after the brothers failed to submit an episode before its broadcast date.
1973 The World Trade Center in New York is officially dedicated.
1974 Hank Aaron of the Atlanta Braves ties Babe Ruth's home run record of 714 in the first inning against the Cincinnati Reds.
1975 Vietnam War: Operation Baby Lift A United States Air Force C 5A Galaxy crashes near Saigon, South Vietnam shortly after takeoff, transporting orphans. 172 people are killed.
1976 Prince Norodom Sihanouk resigns as leader of Cambodia and is placed under house arrest.
1979 President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto of Pakistan is executed.
1981 In Dublin, Ireland, Bucks Fizz win the twenty sixth Eurovision Song Contest for the United Kingdom singing "Making Your Mind Up".
1983 Space Shuttle ''Challenger'' makes its maiden voyage into space.
1984 President Ronald Reagan calls for an international ban on chemical weapons.
1988 Governor Evan Mecham of Arizona is convicted in his impeachment trial and removed from office.
1991 Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania and six others are killed when a helicopter collides with their plane over Merion, Pennsylvania.
1994 Netscape Communications Corporation is founded (under the name "Mosaic Communications Corporation") by Marc Andreessen and Jim Clark.
2003 Sammy Sosa becomes the 18th member of the 500 home run club with a home run at Great American Ball Park in Cincinnati, Ohio.
2004 Muqtada al Sadr's Mahdi Army stage an uprising in several towns and cities in Iraq after the Coalition's closure of Sadr's al Hawza newspaper.
Births
186 Caracalla, Roman emperor (d. 217)
1492 Ambrosius Blarer, German reformer (d. 1564)
1593 Edward Nicholas, English statesman (d. 1669)
1646 Antoine Galland, French archaeologist (d. 1715)
1648 Grinling Gibbons Dutch born woodcarver (d. 1721)
1688 Joseph Nicolas Delisle, French astronomer (d. 1768)
1718 Benjamin Kennicott, English churchman and Hebrew scholar (d. 1783)
1785 Bettina von Arnim, German writer (d. 1859)
1802 Dorothea Dix, American social activist (d. 1887)
1819 Queen Maria II of Portugal (d. 1853)
1826 Z nobe Gramme, Belgian engineer (d. 1901)
1846 Comte de Lautr amont, French writer (d. 1870)
1875 Pierre Monteux, French conductor (d. 1964)
1876 Maurice de Vlaminck, French painter (d. 1958)
1884 Isoroku Yamamoto, Japanese naval commander (d. 1943)
1888 Tris Speaker, baseball player (d. 1958)
1895 Arthur Murray, American dance teacher (d. 1991)
1898 Agnes Ayres, American actress (d. 1940)
1902 Louise Leveque de Vilmorin, French actress (d. 1969)
1906 Bea Benaderet, American actress (d. 1968)
1906 John Cameron Swayze, American journalist and television host (d. 1995)
1911 Max Dupain, Australian photographer (d. 1992)
1913 Frances Langford, American actress (d. 2005)
1914 Marguerite Duras, French writer (d. 1996)
1915 Muddy Waters, American musician (d. 1983)
1920 ric Rohmer, French film director
1922 Elmer Bernstein, American composer (d. 2004)
1924 Gil Hodges, baseball player (d. 1972)
1928 Maya Angelou, American writer
1931 Bobby Ray Inman, American admiral and intelligence director
1932 Anthony Perkins, American actor (d. 1992)
1932 Andrei Tarkovsky, Russian film director (d. 1986)
1932 Richard Lugar, American politician
1934 Clive Davis, American record producer
1938 A. Bartlett Giamatti, American university president and baseball commissioner
1939 Hugh Masekela, South African musician
1940 Sharon Sheeley, American songwriter
1942 Kitty Kelley, American writer
1944 Craig T. Nelson, American actor
1945 Daniel Cohn Bendit, French political activist
1946 Dave Hill, English guitarist (Slade)
1947 Luke Halpin, American actor
1947 Wiranto, Indonesian general
1948 Dan Simmons, American writer
1948 Abdullah calan, Kurdish leader
1948 Derek Thompson, Northern Irish actor
1950 Christine Lahti, American actress
1951 Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia
1952 Rosemarie Ackermann, German athlete
1953 Robert Bertrand, Canadian politician
1956 David E. Kelley, American writer and television producer
1957 Aki Kaurism ki, Finnish film director
1957 Nobuyoshi Kuwano, Japanese television performer and musician (Rats Star)
1958 Mary Margaret Humes, American actress
1960 Jane Eaglin, English soprano
1960 Hugo Weaving, Australian actor
1963 Jack Del Rio, American football player and coach
1963 Graham Norton, Irish talk show host
1963 Dale Hawerchuk, Canadian ice hockey player
1965 Robert Downey Jr., American actor
1968 Jennifer Lynch, American director
1970 Barry Pepper, Canadian actor
1973 David Blaine, American illusionist
1974 Dave Mirra, American athlete
1975 Scott Rolen, baseball player
1975 Delphine Arnault, billionaire French businesswoman
1979 Heath Ledger, Australian actor
1979 Natasha Lyonne, American actress
1980 Bj rn Wirdheim, Swedish race car driver
1991 Jamie Lynn Spears, American television show host
Deaths
397 St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan
896 Pope Formosus (b. 816)
1284 King Alfonso X of Castile (b. 1221)
1292 Pope Nicholas IV (b. 1227)
1305 Jeanne of Navarre, queen of Philip IV of France
1536 Frederick I, Margrave of Brandenburg Ansbach (b. 1460)
1588 King Frederick II of Denmark (b. 1534
1609 Charles de L'Ecluse, Flemish botanist (b. 1526)
1617 John Napier, Scottish mathematician (b. 1550)
1643 Simon Episcopius, Dutch theologian (b. 1583)
1661 Alexander Leslie, 1st Earl of Leven, Scottish soldier
1701 Joseph Haines, entertainer and author
1743 Daniel Neal, English historian (b. 1678)
1761 Theodore Gardelle, Swiss painter and enameler (b. 1722)
1766 John Taylor, English classical scholar (b. 1704)
1774 Oliver Goldsmith, English writer (b. 1728)
1792 James Sykes, American politician (b. 1725)
1807 Joseph J r me Lefran ais de Lalande, French astronomer (b. 1732)
1817 Andr Mass na, French marshal (b. 1758)
1841 William Henry Harrison, 9th President of the United States (b. 1773)
1842 Jean Moufot, French philosopher and mathematician (b. 1784)
1846 Solomon Sibley, Senator from Michigan Territory (b. 1769)
1861 John McLean, U.S. Supreme Court Justice (b. 1785)
1870 Heinrich Gustav Magnus, German chemist and physicist (b. 1802)
1874 Charles Ernest Beul , French archaelogist and politician (b. 1826)
1879 Heinrich Wilhelm Dove, German physicist (b. 1803)
1884 Marie Bashkirtseff, Russian artist and diarist (b. 1860)
1890 Edmond H bert, French geologist (b. 1812)
1919 Sir William Crookes, English chemist and physicist (b. 1832)
1923 John Venn, British mathematician (b. 1834)
1932 Wilhelm Ostwald, German chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1853)
1951 Al Christie, Canadian film director and producer (b. 1881)
1951 George Albert Smith, president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints (b. 1870)
1953 King Carol II of Romania (b. 1893)
1967 H ctor Scarone, Uruguayan footballer (b. 1898)
1968 Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., American civil rights activist, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (assassinated) (b. 1929)
1972 Adam Clayton Powell Jr., American politician (b. 1908)
1972 Stefan Wolpe, German born composer (b. 1902)
1979 Ali Bhutto, President and Prime Minister of Pakistan (b. 1928)
1979 Edgar Buchanan, American actor (b. 1903)
1983 Gloria Swanson, American actress (b. 1897)
1984 Oleg Antonov, Russian airplane engineer (b. 1906)
1987 C.L. Moore, American writer (b. 1911)
1991 Max Frisch, Swiss writer (b. 1911)
1991 H. John Heinz III, U.S. Senator (plane crash) (b. 1938)
1991 Forrest Towns, American hurdler (b. 1914)
1995 Priscilla Lane, American singer, actress
1996 Barney Ewell, American athlete (b. 1918)
1996 Larry LaPrise, American songwriter (b. 1913)
1999 Early Wynn, baseball player (b. 1920)
1999 Faith Domergue American actor (b. 1924)
2001 Ed "Big Daddy" Roth, American custom car designer (b. 1932)
2002 Harry L. O'Connor, Czech born film stuntman
2003 Resortes, Mexican comedian (b. 1916)
2004 Casey Sheehan, American soldier, son of Cindy Sheehan (b. 1979)
2005 Edward Bronfman, Canadian Businessmen (b. 1924)
Holidays and observances
Lesotho Heroes' Day
External links
April 3 April 5 March 4 May 4 listing of all days
af:4 April
ang:4 asterm na
ar:4
an:4 d'abril
ast:4 d'abril
bg:4
be:4
bs:4. april
ca:4 d'abril
ceb:Abril 4
cv: , 4
co:4 d'aprile
cs:4. duben
cy:4 Ebrill
da:4. april
de:4. April
et:4. aprill
el:4
es:4 de abril
eo:4 a de aprilo
eu:Apirilaren 4
fo:4. apr l
fr:4 avril
fy:4 april
ga:4 Aibre n
gl:4 de abril
ko:4 4
hr:4. travnja
io:4 di aprilo
ilo:Abril 4
id:4 April
ia:4 de april
ie:4 april
is:4. apr l
it:4 aprile
he:4
jv:4 April
ka:4
csb:4 kwi ta
ku:4' avr l
lt:Baland io 4
lb:4. Abr ll
li:4 april
hu: prilis 4
mk:4
ms:4 April
nap:4 'e abbrile
nl:4 april
ja:4 4
no:4. april
nn:4. april
oc:4 d'abril
os:4
pl:4 kwietnia
pt:4 de Abril
ro:4 aprilie
ru:4
se:Cuo om nu 4.
sco:4 Aprile
sq:4 Prill
scn:4 di aprili
simple:April 4
sk:4. apr l
sl:4. april
sr:4.
fi:4. huhtikuuta
sv:4 april
tl:Abril 4
tt:4. pril
te: 4
th:4
vi:4 th ng 4
tr:4 Nisan
uk:4
ur:4
wa:4 d' avri
war:Abril 4
zh:4 4
pam:Abril 4
style "float:right "
'''April 6''' is the 96th day of the year in the Gregorian calendar (97th in leap years). There are 269 days remaining.
Events
648 BC Earliest solar eclipse recorded by the Ancient Greeks.
402 Stilicho stymies the Visigoths under Alaric in the Battle of Pollentia
1320 The Scots reaffirm their independence by signing the Declaration of Arbroath.
1327 The poet Petrarch first saw his idealized love Laura in the church of Saint Clare in Avignon.
1652 Dutch sailor Jan van Riebeeck establishes a resupply camp at the Cape of Good Hope, which will eventually develop into Cape Town.
1782 Rama I succeeds King Taksin of Thailand, who was overthrown in a coup d' tat.
1808 John Jacob Astor incorporates the American Fur Company.
1830 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints is formed by Joseph Smith, Jr. at Fayette, New York.
1832 Indian Wars: Black Hawk War begins The Sauk warrior Black Hawk enters into war with the United States.
1841 John Tyler is inaugurated as the 10th President of the United States.
1862 American Civil War: Battle of Shiloh begins In Tennessee, forces under Union General Ulysses S. Grant meet Confederate troops led by General Albert Sidney Johnston at Shiloh.
1865 American Civil War: Battle of Sayler's Creek Confederate General Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia fights its last major battle while in retreat from Richmond, Virginia.
1869 Celluloid is patented.
1886 Vancouver, British Columbia is incorporated as a city.
1893 Salt Lake Temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints dedicated by Wilford Woodruff.
1895 Oscar Wilde is arrested after losing a libel case against the John Sholto Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry.
1896 In Athens, the opening of the first modern Olympic Games after 1,500 years after being banned by Roman Emperor Theodosius I.
1903 The Kishinev pogrom in Kishinev (Bessarabia) began, forcing tens of thousands of Jews to later seek refuge in Israel and the west.
1909 Robert Peary allegedly reaches the North Pole.
1911 Ded Gjon Luli Dedvukaj, Leader of the Mal sori Albanians raises the Albanian flag in the town of Tuzi, Montenegro for the first time after Gjergj Kastrioti (Skenderbeg).
1917 World War I: United States declares war on Germany (see ).
1926 Walter Varney Airlines makes first commercial flight from Pasco, Washington, to Elko, Nevada. Varney is the root company of United Airlines.
1930 Gandhi raised a lump of mud and salt (some say just a pinch, some say just a grain) and declared, "With this, I am shaking the foundations of the British Empire." Thus he started Salt Satyagraha.
1930 Hostess Twinkies are invented.
1930 Will Rogers starts broadcasting ''The Will Rogers Program'' on radio.
1931 ''Little Orphan Annie'' debuts on the Blue Network of NBC.
1936 Tupelo Gainesville Outbreak: Another tornado from the same storm system as the Tupelo tornado hits Gainesville, Georgia, killing 203.
1941 World War II: Operation Castigo begins Germany invades Kingdom of Yugoslavia and Greece.
1965 Early Bird, the first communications satellite to be placed in synchronous orbit, is launched.
1968 In London, United Kingdom, Massiel wins the thirteenth Eurovision Song Contest for Spain singing "La, la, la."
1970 Four California Highway Patrol officers die in one of the worst cop killings in the CHP's history this is known as the Newhall Incident.
1972 Vietnam War: Easter Offensive The first day of clear weather in three days allows American forces to start sustained air strikes and naval bombardments.
1973 Launch of ''Pioneer 11'' spacecraft.
1974 The California Jam Rock concert begins.
1974 In Brighton, United Kingdom, ABBA wins the nineteenth Eurovision Song Contest for Sweden singing "Waterloo."
1984 Members of Cameroon's Republican Guard from country's northern region attack various government buildings in an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government headed by Paul Biya.
1987 Sugar Ray Leonard takes the middleweight boxing title from Marvin Hagler.
1993 Russian nuclear accident at Tomsk 7.
1994 The Rwandan Genocide begins when the aircraft carrying Rwandan president Juv nal Habyarimana and Burundian president Cyprien Ntaryamira is shot down by extremists.
1998 Pakistan tests medium range missiles capable of hitting India.
1998 The Dow Jones Industrial Average gains 49.82 to close at 9,033.23 its first ever close above 9,000.
2001 Miller Park opens in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
2004 Rolandas Paksas becomes the first president of Lithuania to be peacefully removed from the post by impeachment.
Births
1483 Raphael, Italian painter and architect (d. 1520)
1651 Andr Dacier, French classical scholar (d. 1722)
1664 Arvid Horn, Swedish statesman (d. 1742)
1671 Jean Baptiste Rousseau, French poet (d. 1741)
1725 Pasquale Paoli, Corsican patriot and military leader (d. 1807)
1812 Alexander Herzen, Russian writer (d. 1870)
1815 Robert Volkmann, German composer (d. 1883)
1818 Aasmund Olavsson Vinje, Norwegian poet (d. 1870)
1820 Nadar, French photographer (d. 1910)
1823 Joseph Medill, Mayor of Chicago (d. 1899)
1826 Gustave Moreau, French painter (d. 1898)
1849 John William Waterhouse, British painter (d. 1917)
1866 Butch Cassidy, American outlaw (d. 1909)
1878 Erich M hsam, German author (d. 1934)
1884 Walter Huston, Canadian born actor (d. 1950)
1890 Anthony Fokker, Dutch designer of aircraft (d. 1939)
1892 Donald Wills Douglas, Sr., American industrialist (d. 1981)
1892 Lowell Thomas, American travel writer (d. 1981)
1902 Veniamin Kaverin, Russian writer (d. 1989)
1903 Mickey Cochrane, baseball player (d. 1962)
1903 Doc Edgerton, American electrical engineer (d. 1990)
1911 Feodor Felix Konrad Lynen, German biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (d. 1979)
1920 Edmond H. Fischer, Swiss American biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
1926 Sergio Franchi, Italian born singer and actor (d. 1990)
1926 Gil Kane, Latvian born cartoonist (d. 2000)
1926 Ian Paisley, Northern Irish politician
1927 Gerry Mulligan, American musician (d. 1996)
1928 James D. Watson, American geneticist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
1929 Andr Previn, German born composer and conductor
1931 Ivan Dixon, American actor and director
1933 Roy Goode, British lawyer
1934 Anton Geesink, Dutch judoka
1937 Merle Haggard, American musician
1937 Billy Dee Williams, American actor
1938 Paul Daniels, English magician
1938 Roy Thinnes, American actor
1941 Phil Austin, American comedian
1941 Zamfir, Romanian musician
1942 Barry Levinson, American film producer and director
1944 Felicity Palmer, English soprano
1947 John Ratzenberger, American actor
1949 Horst Ludwig St rmer, German born physicist, Nobel Prize laureate
1951 Bert Blyleven, Dutch Major League Baseball player
1952 Udo Dirkschneider, German singer (Accept and U.D.O.)
1952 Marilu Henner, American actress
1954 Thom Bray, American actor
1955 Michael Rooker, American actor
1965 Frank Black, American singer and songwriter (Pixies)
1969 Bison Dele, American basketball player (disappeared 2002)
1969 Ari Meyers, Puerto Rican born American actress
1970 Olaf K lzig, South African hockey player
1973 Donnie Edwards, American football player
1973 Rie Miyazawa, Japanese actress and singer
1975 Zach Braff, American actor
1976 Candace Cameron, American actress
1985 Garrett Zablocki, American guitarist (Senses Fail)
Deaths
1199 King Richard I of England (killed in battle) (b. 1157)
1362 James I, Count of La Marche, French soldier (b. 1319)
1490 King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary
1520 Raphael, Italian painter and architect (b. 1483)
1528 Albrecht D rer, German artist (b. 1471)
1551 Joachim Vadian, Swiss humanist (b. 1484)
1571 John Hamilton, Scottish prelate and politician
1590 Francis Walsingham, English spymaster
1605 John Stow, English historian
1655 David Blondel, French protestant clergyman (b. 1591)
1686 Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey, English royalist statesman (b. 1614)
1707 Willem van de Velde, the younger, Dutch painter (b. 1633)
1755 Richard Rawlinson, English minister and antiquarian (b. 1690)
1829 Niels Henrik Abel, Norwegian mathematician (b. 1802)
1838 Jos Bonif cio de Andrade e Silva, Brazilian statesman and geologist (b. 1763)
1862 Albert Sidney Johnston, American Confederate general (b. 1803)
1883 Benjamin Raymond, Mayor of Chicago (b. 1801)
1906 Alexander Kielland, Norwegian author (b. 1849)
1935 Edwin Arlington Robinson, American poet (b. 1869)
1961 Jules Bordet, Belgian immunologist and microbiologist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1870)
1963 Otto Struve, Russian born astronomer (b. 1897)
1970 Sam Sheppard, American accused murderer (b. 1923)
1971 Igor Stravinsky, Russian composer (b. 1882)
1974 Willem Marinus Dudok, Dutch architect (b. 1884)
1986 Raimundo Orsi, Argentine Italian footballer
1992 Isaac Asimov, Russian born author (b. 1920)
1994 Juv nal Habyarimana, President of Rwanda (b. 1937)
1994 Cyprien Ntaryamira, President of Burundi (b. 1956)
1996 Greer Garson, Irish actress (b. 1904)
1998 Wendy O. Williams, American musician (Plasmatics) (b. 1949)
1998 Tammy Wynette, American musician (b. 1942)
2000 Habib Bourguiba, President of Tunisia (b. 1903)
2003 David Bloom, American reporter (pulmonary embolism) (b. 1963)
2003 Babatunde Olatunji, Nigerian drummer (b. 1927)
2004 Larisa Bogoraz, Soviet dissident (b. 1929)
2005 Rainier III, Prince of Monaco (b. 1923)
Holidays and observances
Feast day of St. Sixtus and Marcellinus of Carthage in the Roman Catholic Church.
The start of the tax year in the United Kingdom (arising from the 11 day correction to March 25 at the adoption of the Gregorian calendar in 1752).
Tartan Day, a day set aside for the celebration of the Scottish influence on America.
The date of organization of the Church of Christ, and the start of the Restoration Movement by Joseph Smith Junior, from which are various off shoots such as the Community of Christ and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints, officially organized on April 6th 1830.
External links
April 5 April 7 March 6 May 6 listing of all days
af:6 April
an:6 d'abril
ar:6
ast:6 d'abril
be:6
bg:6
bs:6. april
ca:6 d'abril
ceb:Abril 6
cs:6. duben
csb:6 kwi ta
cy:6 Ebrill
da:6. april
de:6. April
el:6
eo:6 a de aprilo
es:6 de abril
et:6. aprill
eu:Apirilaren 6
fi:6. huhtikuuta
fr:6 avril
fy:6 april
ga:6 Aibre n
gl:6 de abril
he:6
hr:6. travnja
hu: prilis 6
ia:6 de april
id:6 April
ie:6 april
io:6 di aprilo
is:6. apr l
it:6 aprile
ja:4 6
ka:6
ko:4 6
ku:6' avr l
lb:6. Abr ll
li:6 april
lt:Baland io 6
mk:6
nl:6 april
nn:6. april
no:6. april
oc:6 d'abril
pl:6 kwietnia
pt:6 de Abril
ro:6 aprilie
ru:6
scn:6 di aprili
se:Cuo om nu 5.
simple:April 6
sk:6. apr l
sl:6. april
sq:6 Prill
sr:6.
sv:6 april
th:6
tl:Abril 6
tr:6 Nisan
tt:6. pril
uk:6
ur:6
vi:6 th ng 4
wa:6 d' avri
zh:4 6
style "float:right "
'''April 12''' is the 102nd day of the year in the Gregorian calendar (103rd in leap years). There are 263 days remaining.
Events
467 Anthemius is elevated to Emperor of the Western Roman Empire
1606 The Union Jack is adopted as the national flag of Great Britain.
1633 The formal interrogation by the Inquisition of Galileo Galilei begins.
1861 American Civil War: The war begins with Confederate forces firing on Fort Sumter, in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina.
1864 American Civil War: Fort Pillow massacre Confederate forces under General Nathan Bedford Forrest kill most of the African American soldiers who had surrendered at Fort Pillow, Tennessee
1865 American Civil War: Mobile, Alabama, falls to the Union Army.
1877 The United Kingdom annexes the Transvaal.
1923 Kandersteg International Scout Centre came into existence.
1926 By a vote of 45 to 41, the United States Senate unseats Iowa Senator Smith W. Brookhart and seats Daniel F. Steck, after Brookhart had already served for over one year.
1937 Sir Frank Whittle ground tests the first jet engine designed to power an aircraft, at the British Thomson Houston factory in Rugby, England
1945 President Franklin D. Roosevelt dies, and Harry S. Truman is inaugurated as the 33rd President of the United States.
1946 Syria gains independence from France.
1954 Bill Haley and His Comets record "Rock Around the Clock" in New York City. Initially unsuccessful, the recording would help launch the rock and roll revolution a year later.
1955 The polio vaccine, developed by Dr. Jonas Salk, is declared safe and effective.
1961 Yuri Gagarin becomes the first man to fly in space.
1968 Nerve gas accident at Skull Valley, Utah.
1975 Khmer Rouge troops capture Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
1980 Terry Fox began his trans Canada marathon to raise money for cancer research (''Marathon of Hope'') by dipping his artificial leg in the Atlantic Ocean at St. John's, Newfoundland, aiming to dip it again in the Pacific Ocean at Vancouver, British Columbia.
1981 The first launch of a Space Shuttle: ''Columbia'' launches on the STS 1 mission.
1984 LiSARS is created
1989 TV show ''Fast Forward'' starts on the ATN 7 Network (Australia).
1990 Christian Bernard, F.R.C., becomes Imperator of AMORC.
1992 Euro Disneyland opens in Marne la Vallee, France.
1994 Canter Siegel post the first commercial mass Usenet spam.
1996 Yahoo! had its initial public offering, selling 2.6 million shares at 13 each.
1998 Catastrophical earthquake in Slovenia in Poso je 5,6 on the Richter scale.
2002 Coup d'Etat against Hugo Ch vez in Venezuela.
2005 In Canada, a motion by the opposition Conservative Party to kill legislation opening the door for legalized same sex marriage is defeated 164 132.
Births
599 BC Mahavira, Indian founder of Jainism (d. 527 BC)
812 Muhammad at Taqi, Arabian Shia Imam (d. 835)
1484 Antonio da Sangallo the Younger, Italian architect (d. 1546)
1500 Joachim Camerarius, German classical scholar (d. 1574)
1526 Muretus, French humanist (d. 1585)
1550 Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, English politician (d. 1604)
1577 King Christian IV of Denmark (d. 1648)
1713 Guillaume Thomas Fran ois Raynal, French writer (d. 1796)
1722 Pietro Nardini, Italian composer (d. 1793)
1724 Lyman Hall, American signer of the Declaration of Independence (d. 1790)
1726 Charles Burney, English music historian (d. 1814)
1748 Antoine Laurent de Jussieu, French botanist (d. 1836)
1777 Henry Clay, American statesman and five time Presidential candidate (d. 1852)
1794 Germinal Pierre Dandelin, Belgian mathematician (d. 1847)
1799 Henri Druey, Swiss Federal Councilor (d. 1855)
1823 Alexandr Ostrovsky, Russian dramatist (d. 1886)
1839 Nikolai Przhevalsky, Russian explorer (d. 1888)
1856 William Martin Conway, English art critic and mountaineer (d. 1937)
1869 Henri D sir Landru, French serial killer (d. 1922)
1884 Otto Meyerhof, German born biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (d. 1951)
1887 Harold Lockwood, American silent film actor (d. 1918)
1888 Heinrich Neuhaus, Soviet pianist (d. 1964)
1892 Johnny Dodds, American jazz clarinetist (d. 1940)
1893 Robert Harron, American actor (d. 1920)
1898 Lily Pons, American soprano (d. 1976)
1902 Louis Beel, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 1977)
1903 Sally Rand, American dancer and actress (d. 1979)
1903 Jan Tinbergen, Dutch economist, Bank of Sweden Prize winner (d. 1994)
1907 Felix de Weldon, Austrian born sculptor (d. 2003)
1908 Lionel Hampton, American musician (d. 2002)
1912 Walt Gorney, American actor (d. 2004)
1916 Beverly Cleary, American writer
1917 Helen Forrest, American singer (d. 1999)
1922 Tiny Tim, American musician (d. 1996)
1923 Ann Miller, American actress and dancer (d. 2004)
1928 Hardy Kr ger, German actor
1928 Jean Fran ois Paillard, French conductor
1932 Dennis Banks, American activist
1932 Lakshman Kadirgamar, Sri Lankan Politician (assassinated) (d. 2005)
1933 Montserrat Caball , Catalan soprano
1935 Johnny Bucyk, Canadian ice hockey player
1939 Alan Ayckbourn, English writer
1940 Herbie Hancock, American pianist and composer
1941 Bobby Moore, English footballer (d. 1993)
1944 John Kay, German born musician (Steppenwolf)
1946 Ed O'Neill, American actor
1947 Tom Clancy, American author
1947 David Letterman, American talk show host
1948 Jeremy Beadle, British television presenter
1948 Joschka Fischer, Foreign Minister of Germany
1948 Sandra "Lois" Reeves, American singer (Martha the Vandellas)
1949 Scott Turow, American writer
1950 David Cassidy, American singer and actor
1950 Kari Palaste, Finnish architect
1952 Ralph Wiley, American sports journalist (d. 2004)
1954 Pat Travers, Canadian musician
1956 Andy Garcia, Cuban born actor
1956 Herbert Gr nemeyer, German singer, pianist, and actor
1957 Vince Gill, American musician
1961 Lisa Gerrard, Australian singer and film composer
1962 Art Alexakis, American musician (Everclear)
1964 Amy Ray, American musician (Indigo Girls)
1970 Nick Hexum, American musician (311)
1971 Nicholas Brendon, actor
1971 Shannen Doherty, American actress
1978 Guy Berryman, British musician (Coldplay)
1978 Riley Smith, American actor
1979 Claire Danes, American actress
1979 Mateja Ke man, Serbian footballer
1982 Deen, Bosnian singer
1985 Hitomi Yoshizawa, Japanese singer (Morning Musume)
Deaths
65 Seneca the Younger, Roman philosopher, statesman and dramatist
238 Gordian I, Roman Emperor (suicide)
238 Gordian II, heir to the Roman Empire (killed in battle)
1443 Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury
1550 Claude, Duke of Guise, French soldier (b. 1496)
1555 Juana of Castile, queen of Philip I of Castile (b. 1479)
1687 Ambrose Dixon, Virginia Colony pioneer
1704 Jacques B nigne Bossuet, French bishop and writer (b. 1627)
1748 William Kent, English architect
1782 Metastasio, Italian poet and librettist (b. 1698)
1788 Carlo Antonio Campioni, French born composer (b. 1719)
1795 Johann Kaspar Basselet von La Ros e, Bavarian general (b. 1710)
1814 Charles Burney, English music historian (b. 1726)
1850 Adoniram Judson, American Baptist missionary (b. 1788)
1902 Marie Alfred Cornu, French physicist (b. 1842)
1912 Clara Barton, American nurse and Red Cross advocate (b. 1821)
1938 Feodor Chaliapin, Russian bass (b. 1873)
1945 Franklin D. Roosevelt, 32nd President of the United States (b. 1882)
1962 Sir Mokshagundam Visvesvaraya, Indian politician and engineer (b. 1861)
1971 Igor Tamm, Russian physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1895)
1971 Ed Lafitte, American baseball player (b. 1871)
1975 Josephine Baker, American dancer (b. 1906)
1980 Clark McConachy, New Zealand billiards and snooker player (b. 1895)
1980 William R. Tolbert, Jr., President of Liberia (b. 1913)
1981 Joe Louis, American boxer (b. 1914)
1986 Valentin Kataev, Russian writer (b. 1897)
1988 Alan Paton, South African novelist (b. 1903)
1989 Gerald Flood, British actor (b. 1927)
1989 Abbie Hoffman, American radical leader (b. 1936)
1989 Sugar Ray Robinson, American boxer (b. 1921)
1997 George Wald, American scientist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1903)
1999 Boxcar Willie, American singer (b. 1931)
2003 Cecil H. Green, American manufacturer (b. 1900)
Holidays and observances
The Roman holiday of Cerealia begins.
Yuri's Night, an international celebration of the first human in space, Yuri Gagarin.
External links
From "Lines in Praise of a Date Made Praiseworthy Solely by Something Very Nice That Happened to It", by Ogden Nash:
:"As through the calendar I delve
:I pause to rejoice in April twelve.
:Yea, be I in sickness or be I in health
:My favorite date is April twealth.
:..."
April 11 April 13 March 12 May 12 listing of all days
af:12 April
ar:12
an:12 d'abril
ast:12 d'abril
bg:12
be:12
bs:12. april
ca:12 d'abril
ceb:Abril 12
cv: , 12
co:12 d'aprile
cs:12. duben
cy:12 Ebrill
da:12. april
de:12. April
et:12. aprill
el:12
es:12 de abril
eo:12 a de aprilo
eu:Apirilaren 12
fo:12. apr l
fr:12 avril
fy:12 april
ga:12 Aibre n
gl:12 de abril
ko:4 12
hr:12. travnja
io:12 di aprilo
id:12 April
ia:12 de april
ie:12 april
is:12. apr l
it:12 aprile
he:12
jv:12 April
ka:12
csb:12 kwi ta
ku:12' avr l
lt:Baland io 12
lb:12. Abr ll
li:12 april
hu: prilis 12
mk:12
ms:12 April
nap:12 'e abbrile
nl:12 april
ja:4 12
no:12. april
nn:12. april
oc:12 d'abril
pl:12 kwietnia
pt:12 de Abril
ro:12 aprilie
ru:12
se:Cuo om nu 12.
sco:12 Aprile
sq:12 Prill
scn:12 di aprili
simple:April 12
sk:12. apr l
sl:12. april
sr:12.
fi:12. huhtikuuta
sv:12 april
tl:Abril 12
tt:12. pril
te: 12
th:12
vi:12 th ng 4
tr:12 Nisan
uk:12
ur:12
wa:12 d' avri
war:Abril 12
zh:4 12
pam:Abril 12
! Language links at bottom
style "float:right "
'''April 15''' is the 105th day of the year in the Gregorian calendar (106th in leap years). There are 260 days remaining.
Events
1450 Battle of Formigny Toward the end of the Hundred Years' War, the French attack and nearly annihilate English forces, ending English domination in northern France.
1632 Battle of Rain Swedes under Gustavus Adolphus defeat the Holy Roman Empire during the Thirty Years' War.
1738 Premiere in London of Serse, an Italian opera byGeorge Frideric Handel.
1755 Samuel Johnson's ''A Dictionary of the English Language'' published in London.
1783 Preliminary articles of peace ending Revolutionary War ratified.
1802 William Wordsworth and his sister, Dorothy come across a "long belt" of daffodils, inspiring the former to pen ''I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud''.
1865 Abraham Lincoln dies after being shot the previous evening by John Wilkes Booth.
1865 Andrew Johnson becomes the 17th President of the United States.
1892 The General Electric Company is formed through the merger of the Edison General Electric Company and the Thomson Houston Company.
1912 The British passenger liner RMS ''Titanic'' sinks at about 2:20 a.m. after hitting an iceberg in the North Atlantic almost three hours earlier.
1915 The Armenian Genocide began when the Ottoman Empire undertook the systematic annihilation of Armenian intellectuals and entrepreneurs within the city of Constantinople and later the entire Armenian population of the Empire.
1920 Anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti allegedly murder two security guards while robbing a shoe store.
1923 Insulin first became generally available for use by diabetics.
1924 Rand McNally publishes its first road atlas.
1927 Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford and Norma and Constance Talmadge become the first celebrities to leave their footprints in cement at Grauman's Chinese Theater in Hollywood.
1940 The Allies start their attack on the Norwegian town of Narvik which was occupied by Nazi Germany.
1942 George Cross awarded to "to the island fortress of Malta its people and defenders" by King George VI.
1945 The Bergen Belsen concentration camp is liberated.
1947 Jackie Robinson debuts for the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team, breaking that sport's color line.
1955 The first McDonald's restaurant opens in Des Plaines, Illinois.
1983 Tokyo Disneyland opens.
1985 Marvin Hagler defeats Thomas Hearns by a knockout in round three to retain boxing's world Middleweight championship in a fight nicknamed ''The War''.
1989 Hillsborough disaster: A human stampede occurs at Hillsborough, a football stadium in Sheffield, England, resulting in the loss of 96 lives.
1989 Upon Hu Yaobang's death, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 begin in the People's Republic of China.
1994 Representatives of 124 countries and the European Communities sign the Marrakesh Agreements revising the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and setting up the World Trade Organization (effective January 1 1995).
1997 Fire sweeps through a campsite of Muslims making the Hajj pilgrimage the official death toll is 343.
2002 An Air China Boeing 767 200, flight CA129 crashes into hillside during heavy rain and fog near Pusan, South Korea, killing 128.
Births
1452 Leonardo da Vinci, Italian artist (d. 1519)
1489 Sinan, Ottoman architect (d. 1588)
1552 Pietro Cataldi, Italian mathematician (d. 1626)
1580 George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore, English politician and colonizer
1588 Claudius Salmasius, French classical scholar (d. 1653)
1641 Robert Sibbald, Scottish physician and antiquarian (d. 1722)
1642 Suleiman II, Ottoman Sultan (d. 1691)
1646 King Christian V of Denmark (d. 1699)
1684 Catherine I of Russia (d. 1727)
1688 Johann Friedrich Fasch, German composer (d. 1758)
1707 Leonhard Euler, Swiss mathematician (d. 1783)
1710 William Cullen, Scottish physician and chemist (d. 1790)
1721 Prince William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, English military leader (d. 1765)
1772 tienne Geoffroy Saint Hilaire, French naturalist (d. 1844)
1793 Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, German astronomer (d. 1864)
1794 Jean Pierre Flourens, French physiologist (d. 1867)
1800 James Clark Ross, English explorer (d. 1862)
1809 Hermann Grassmann, German mathematician and physicist (d. 1877)
1832 Wilhelm Busch, German poet and artist (d. 1908)
1843 Henry James, American author (d. 1916)
1858 mile Durkheim, French sociologist (d. 1917)
1861 Bliss Carman, Canadian poet (d. 1929)
1874 Johannes Stark, German physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1957)
1878 Robert Walser, Swiss writer (d. 1956)
1879 Melville Henry Cane, American lawyer and poet (d. 1980)
1883 Stanley Bruce, eighth Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1967)
1886 Nikolay Gumilyov, Russian poet (d. 1921)
1889 Thomas Hart Benton, American muralist (d. 1975)
1889 A. Philip Randolph, American activist (d. 1979)
1894 Bessie Smith, American blues singer (d. 1937)
1895 Clark McConachy, New Zealand billiards and snooker player (d. 1980)
1896 Nikolay Nikolayevich Semyonov, Russian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1986)
1901 Joe Davis, English snooker player (d. 1978)
1902 Fernando Pessa, Portuguese journalist (d. 2002)
1907 Nikolaas Tinbergen, Dutch ornithologist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (d. 1988)
1912 Kim Il Sung, President of North Korea (d. 1994)
1916 Alfred S. Bloomingdale, American businessman (d. 1982)
1917 Hans Conried, American actor (d. 1982)
1920 Richard von Weiz cker, President of Germany
1921 Georgi Beregovoi, cosmonaut (d. 1995)
1922 Michael Ansara, Syrian American actor
1922 Harold Washington, Mayor of Chicago (d. 1987)
1924 Sir Neville Marriner, English conductor and violinist
1927 Robert Mills, American physicist (d. 1999)
1930 Vigd s Finnbogad ttir, President of Iceland
1933 Roy Clark, American musician
1933 Elizabeth Montgomery, American actress (d. 1995)
1933 Boris Strugatsky, Russian author
1939 Claudia Cardinale, Tunisian born actress
1940 Jeffrey Archer, British author and Member of Parliament
1940 Robert Walker Jr., American actor
1942 Francis X. DiLorenzo, American Catholic prelate
1942 Walt Hazzard, American basketball player
1944 Dzhokhar Dudaev, Chechen leader (d. 1996)
1944 Dave Edmunds, Welsh musician
1947 Lois Chiles, American actress
1947 Mike Chapman, songwriter (with Nicky Chinn) and producer (Suzi Quatro, Sweet, Blondie)
1948 Michael Kamen, American composer (d. 2003)
1949 Tonio K, American singer
1949 Alla Pugacheva, Russian singer
1950 Amy Wright, American actress
1951 Heloise, American newspaper columnist
1954 Seka, American actress
1955 Dodi Al Fayed, Egyptian businessman (d. 1997)
1957 Evelyn Ashford, American athlete
1958 Benjamin Zephaniah, British writer and musician
1959 Emma Thompson, English actress
1959 Thomas F. Wilson, American actor
1960 Tony Jones, English snooker player
1962 Nawal El Moutawakel, Morrocan hurdler
1963 Bobby Pepper, American journalist
1965 Linda Perry, American musician
1966 Samantha Fox, English singer and model
1967 Frankie Poullain, British bassist (The Darkness)
1967 Dara Torres, American swimmer
1968 Ed O'Brien, British musician (Radiohead)
1968 Stacey Williams, American model
1970 Flex Alexander, American actor
1972 Arturo Gatti, Canadian boxer
1974 Danny Pino, American actor
1974 Josh Todd, musician and singer (Buckcherry)
1977 Chandra Levy, American Congressional intern (d. 2001)
1980 Ra l L pez, Spanish basketball player
1981 Andr s d'Alessandro, Argentine football player
1983 Ilya Kovalchuk, Russian hockey player
1986 Quincy Owusu Abeyie, Dutch footballer
1990 Emma Watson, English actress
1992 Amy Diamond, Swedish pop singer
Deaths
1053 Godwin, Earl of Wessex
1220 Adolf of Altena, Archbishop of Cologne
1415 Manuel Chrysoloras, Greek humanist
1446 Filippo Brunelleschi, Italian architect (b. 1377)
1610 Robert Parsons, English Jesuit priest (b. 1546)
1621 John Carver, first governor of Plymouth Colony
1641 Domenico Zampieri, Italian painter (b. 1581)
1659 Simon Dach, German poet (b. 1605)
1704 Johann van Waveren Hudde, Dutch mathematician (b. 1628)
1719 Fran oise d'Aubign , marquise de Maintenon, second wife of Louis XIV of France (b. 1635)
1754 Jacopo Riccati, Italian mathematician (b. 1676)
1761 Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll, Scottish politician (b. 1682)
1761 William Oldys, English antiquarian and bibliographer (b. 1696)
1764 Madame de Pompadour, mistress of King Louis XIV of France (b. 1721)
1765 Mikhail Lomonosov, Russian scientist and writer (b. 1711)
1788 Giuseppe Bonno, Austrian composer (b. 1711)
1793 Ignacije Szentmartony, Croatian Jesuit missionary and geographer (b. 1718)
1804 Charles Pichegru, French general (strangled in prison) (b. 1761)
1843 Noah Webster, American lexicographer (b. 1758)
1854 Arthur Aikin, English chemist, mineralogist, and scientific writer (b. 1773)
1865 Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States (b. 1809)
1888 Matthew Arnold, English poet (b. 1822)
1888 Father Damien, Belgian missionary (b. 1840)
1898 Kepa Te Rangihiwinui, Maori military leader
1912 Victims of the RMS Titanic
Edward Smith, Captain of the Titanic (b. 1850)
John Jacob Astor IV, American businessman (b. 1864)
Benjamin Guggenheim, American businessman (b. 1865)
1938 C sar Vallejo, Peruvian poet (b. 1892)
1942 Robert Musil, German novelist (b. 1880)
1949 Wallace Beery, American actor (b. 1885)
1962 Clara Blandick, American actress (b. 1881)
1964 Rachel Carson, American biologist and author (b. 1907)
1969 Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, Queen of Spain (b. 1887)
1971 Dan Reeves Owner of the Cleveland Los Angeles Rams (b. 1912)
1974 Giovanni D'Anzi, Italian songwriter (b.1906)
1975 Richard Conte, American actor (b. 1910)
1980 Raymond Bailey, American actor (b. 1904)
1980 Jean Paul Sartre, French philosopher and writer, Nobel Prize laureate (declined) (b. 1905)
1982 Arthur Lowe, British actor (b. 1915)
1984 Tommy Cooper, Welsh comedy magician (b. 1921)
1986 Jean Genet, French author (b. 1910)
1988 Kenneth Williams, English actor and comedian (b. 1926)
1988 Tony Mann, Australian footballer
1989 Hu Yaobang, leader of China (b. 1915)
1990 Greta Garbo, Swedish actress (b. 1905)
1993 John Tuzo Wilson, Canadian geologist (b. 1908)
1993 Leslie Charteris, Singapore born author (b. 1907)
1994 John Curry, English figure skater (b. 1949)
1998 Pol Pot, Cambodian dictator (b. 1925)
2000 Edward Gorey, American illustrator (b. 1925)
2001 Joey Ramone, American musician and singer (The Ramones) (b. 1951)
2002 Damon Knight, author (b. 1922)
2002 Byron "Whizzer" White, American football player and U.S. Supreme Court Justice (b. 1917)
2003 Erin Fleming, Canadian actress (b. 1941)
Holidays and observances
In the United States, today is the official deadline for filing tax returns: all forms mailed to the IRS must be postmarked no later than today, so post offices across the stay open until midnight to accommodate procrastinators (or those who owe tax and want to wait as late as possible to pay). (If this day falls on the weekend, as in 2006, the following Monday becomes the deadline.)
Ancient Latvia Tipsa Diena was observed
Arirang Festival is held in North Korea to commemorate Kim Il sung's birth
Father Damien Day celebrated annually in Hawai'i
Feast day of Saint Paternus
Roman Empire the Fordicia was celebrated in honor of Terra
Major League Baseball celebrates "Jackie Robinson Day" each April 15 in all MLB ballparks
External links
April 14 April 16 March 15 May 15 listing of all days
af:15 April
an:15 d'abril
ar:15
ast:15 d'abril
be:15
bg:15
bs:15. april
ca:15 d'abril
ceb:Abril 15
co:15 d'aprile
cs:15. duben
csb:15 kwi ta
cv: , 15
cy:15 Ebrill
da:15. april
de:15. April
el:15
eo:15 a de aprilo
es:15 de abril
et:15. aprill
eu:Apirilaren 15
fi:15. huhtikuuta
fo:15. apr l
fr:15 avril
fy:15 april
ga:15 Aibre n
gl:15 de abril
he:15
hr:15. travnja
hu: prilis 15
ia:15 de april
id:15 April
ie:15 april
io:15 di aprilo
is:15. apr l
it:15 aprile
ja:4 15
jv:15 April
ka:15
ko:4 15
ku:15' avr l
lb:15. Abr ll
li:15 april
lt:Baland io 15
mk:15
ms:15 April
nap:15 'e abbrile
nl:15 april
nn:15. april
no:15. april
oc:15 d'abril
pam:Abril 15
pl:15 kwietnia
pt:15 de Abril
ro:15 aprilie
ru:15
scn:15 di aprili
sco:15 Aprile
se:Cuo om nu 15.
simple:April 15
sk:15. apr l
sl:15. april
sq:15 Prill
sr:15.
sv:15 april
te: 15
th:15
tl:Abril 15
tr:15 Nisan
tt:15. pril
uk:15
ur:15
vi:15 th ng 4
wa:15 d' avri
war:Abril 15
zh:4 15
! Language links at bottom
style "float:right "
'''April 30''' is the 120th day of the year in the Gregorian calendar (121st in leap years), with 245 days remaining, as the last day in April.
Events
313 Roman emperor Licinius unifies the entire Eastern Roman Empire under his rule.
711 Moorish troops led by Tariq ibn Ziyad land at Gibraltar to begin their invasion of the Iberian Peninsula (Al Andalus).
1429 Joan of Arc arrives to relieve the Siege of Orl ans.
1483 Orbital calculations suggest that on this day Pluto moved inside Neptune's orbit, making Neptune the furthest planet from the Sun until July 23, 1503.
1492 Spain gives Christopher Columbus his commission of exploration.
1671 Petar Zrinski, the Croatian Ban from the Zrinski family, is executed.
1794 The Battle of Boulou is fought, in which French forces defeated the Spanish under General Union.
1789 On the balcony of Federal Hall on Wall Street in New York City, George Washington takes the oath of office to become the first elected President of the United States.
1803 Louisiana Purchase: The United States purchases the Louisiana Territory from France for 15 million, more than doubling overnight the size of the young nation.
1812 The Territory of Orleans becomes the 18th U.S. state under the name Louisiana.
1838 Nicaragua declares independence from the Central American Federation
1863 Mexican forces attacked the French Foreign Legion in Hacienda Camar n,Mexico.
1894 Coxey's Army reaches Washington, D.C. to protest the unemployment caused by the Panic of 1893.
1900 Hawaii becomes a territory of the United States, with Sanford B. Dole as governor.
1900 Casey Jones dies attempting to save the runaway train Cannonball Express.
1904 The Louisiana Purchase Exposition World's Fair opens in Saint Louis, Missouri.
1920 Peru becomes a signatory to the Buenos Aires copyright treaty.
1925 Automaker Dodge Brothers, Inc is sold to Dillon, Read Company for USD 146 million plus 50 million for charity.
1927 The Federal Industrial Institute for Women, opens in Alderson, West Virginia, as the first women's federal prison in the United States.
1938 The animated cartoon short ''Porky's Hare Hunt'' debuts in movie theaters, introducing Bugs Bunny.
1939 Franklin D. Roosevelt becomes the first President of the United States to appear on television.
1939 The 1939 New York World's Fair opens.
1943 World War II: Operation Mincemeat The submarine HMS ''Seraph'' surfaces in the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Spain to deposit a dead man planted with false invasion plans and dressed as a British military intelligence officer.
1945 Adolf Hitler and Eva Braun commit suicide after being married for one day.
1947 In Nevada, the Boulder Dam is officially renamed Hoover Dam again.
1948 In Bogot , Colombia, the Organization of American States is established.
1966 Anton LaVey founds the Church of Satan.
1973 Watergate Scandal: President Richard Nixon announces that top White House aids H.R. Haldeman, John Ehrlichman, and others have resigned.
1975 Communist forces gains control of Saigon. The Vietnam War formally ends with the unconditional surrender of South Vietnamese president Duong Van Minh.
1980 Accession of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands.
1983 Michael Jackson's song "Beat It" hits number 1 on the Billboard music charts.
1988 In Dublin, Ireland, C line Dion wins the thirty third Eurovision Song Contest for Switzerland singing "Ne partez pas sans moi" (Don't leave without me).
1991 A tropical cyclone hits Bangladesh killing an estimated 138,000 people.
1992 The last episode of the ''Cosby Show'' airs.
1993 The World Wide Web was born at CERN
1993 During a changeover at a tennis tournament in Hamburg, Germany, Monica Seles is stabbed in the back by a deranged fan of rival Steffi Graf. Seles would not play competitively for more than two years after the incident.
1994 In Dublin, Ireland, Paul Harrington Charlie McGettigan win the thirty ninth Eurovision Song Contest for Ireland singing "Rock'n'Roll Kids".
1995 U.S. President Bill Clinton became the first U.S. President to visit Northern Ireland.
1997 Ellen DeGeneres's character comes out of the closet on the sitcom Ellen.
1999 NATO membership expands by approving the admission of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland.
1999 Cambodia joins the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) bringing the total members to 10.
1999 Neo nazi bomber David Copeland detonates his third bomb in front of the Admiral Duncan pub and is arrested the night after.
2001 Chandra Levy, a former intern to California Congressman Gary Condit, is last seen in Washington, D.C.
2002 A referendum in Pakistan overwhelmingly approves the Presidency of Pervez Musharraf for another five years.
2002 The law N26 "On the National Flag of the Udmurt Republic" has appeared.
2004 The last edition of NPR's ''Morning Edition'' with Bob Edwards as host airs.
Births
1586 Saint Rose of Lima, Peruvian saint (d. 1617)
1602 William Lilly, English astrologer (d. 1681)
1623 Fran ois de Laval, first bishop of New France (d. 1708)
1651 Jean Baptiste de la Salle, French educational reformer (d. 1719)
1662 Queen Mary II of England (d. 1694)
1664 Fran ois Louis, Prince of Conti, French general (d. 1709)
1710 Johann Kaspar Basselet von La Ros e, Bavarian general (d. 1795)
1723 Mathurin Jacques Brisson, French naturalist (d. 1806)
1721 Roger Sherman, American signer of the Declaration of Independence (d. 1793)
1777 Carl Friedrich Gauss, German mathematician, astronomer, and physicist (d. 1855)
1829 Ferdinand von Hochstetter, Austrian geologist (d. 1884)
1857 Eugene Bleuler, Swiss psychiatrist (d. 1940)
1865 Max Nettlau, German anarchist and historian (d. 1944)
1870 Franz Lehar, Austrian composer (d. 1948)
1876 Orso Mario Corbino, Italian physicist (d. 1937)
1877 Alice B. Toklas, American companion of Gertrude Stein (d. 1967)
1883 Jaroslav Haek, Czech novelist (d. 1923)
1893 Joachim von Ribbentrop, Nazi foreign minister (d. 1946)
1901 Simon Kuznets, Ukrainian born economist, Bank of Sweden Prize winner (d. 1985)
1902 Theodore Schultz, American economist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1998)
1908 Bjarni Benediktsson, Icelandic foreign and later prime minister (d. 1970)
1909 Queen Juliana of the Netherlands (d. 2004)
1909 F. E. McWilliam, Northern Irish sculptor (d. 1992)
1910 Al Lewis, American actor and politician (d. 2006)
1916 Claude Shannon, American engineer and mathematician (d. 2001)
1916 Robert Shaw, American conductor (d. 1999)
1925 Johnny Horton, American musician (d. 1960)
1930 Lawton Chiles, American politician (d. 1998)
1933 Willie Nelson, American musician, composer, and actor
1938 Larry Niven, American author
1940 Burt Young, American actor
1941 Johnny Farina, American guitarist (Santo and Johnny)
1943 Bobby Vee, American singer
1944 Jill Clayburgh, American actress
1945 Annie Dillard, American writer
1945 Michael Smith, astronaut (d. 1986)
1946 King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden
1946 Don Schollander, American swimmer
1947 Finn Kalvik, Norwegian singer
1948 Perry King, American actor
1949 Phil Garner, baseball manager
1949 Antonio Guterres, Prime Minister of Portugal
1954 Jane Campion, New Zealand film director
1955 Nicolas Hulot, French journalist and author
1956 Jorge Chamin , Portuguese baritone
1956 Lars von Trier, Danish film director
1959 Stephen Harper, Prime Minister of Canada
1961 Isiah Thomas, American basketball player, coach, and team owner
1964 Barrington Levy, Jamaican musician
1969 Paulo Jr., Brazilian bassist (Sepultura)
1969 Clark Vogeler, American guitarist (The Toadies)
1975 Elliott Sadler, American race car driver
1981 John O'Shea, Irish footballer
1982 Kirsten Dunst, American actress, Justin Green, National Football League fullback
1983 Troy Williamson, American football player
1987 Nikki Webster, Australian pop singer and entertainer
Deaths
65 Lucan, Roman poet (b. 39)
1063 Emperor Renzong of China (b. 1010)
1341 John III, Duke of Brittany (b. 1285)
1439 Richard de Beauchamp, 13th Earl of Warwick, English military leader (b. 1382)
1524 Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard, French soldier (b. 1473)
1544 Thomas Audley, 1st Baron Audley of Walden, Lord Chancellor of England
1555 Pope Marcellus II (b. 1501)
1632 Johan Tzerclaes, Count of Tilly, Bavarian general (b. 1559)
1642 Dmitry Pozharsky, Russian prince (b. 1578)
1660 Petrus Scriverius, Dutch writer (b. 1576)
1655 Eustache Le Sueur, French painter (b. 1617)
1696 Robert Plot, British naturalist (b. 1640)
1712 Philipp van Limborch, Dutch protestant theologian (b. 1633)
1736 Johann Albert Fabricius, German classical scholar and bibliographer (b. 1668)
1758 Fran ois d'Agincourt, French composer (b. 1684)
1792 John Montagu, Supposed inventor of the sandwich (b. 1718)
1795 Jean Jacques Barth lemy, French writer and numismatist (b. 1716)
1847 Archduke Charles, Austrian general (b. 1771)
1865 Robert Fitzroy, English admiral and meteorologist (b. 1805)
1875 Jean Frederic Waldeck, French explorer, lithographer, and cartographer (b. 1766)
1883 douard Manet, French painter (b. 1832)
1903 Emily Stowe, Canadian physician and suffragist (b.1831)
1936 Alfred Edward Housman, English poet (b. 1859)
1943 Otto Jespersen, Danish philologist (b. 1860)
1945 Eva Braun, Adolf Hitler's new wife (suicide) (b. 1912)
1945 Adolf Hitler, Austrian dictator of Germany (suicide) (b. 1889)
1956 Alben W. Barkley, Vice President of the United States (b. 1877)
1970 Inger Stevens, Swedish actress (b. 1934)
1974 Agnes Moorehead, American actress (b. 1900)
1980 Luis Mu oz Mar n, Puerto Rican poet, journalist, and politician (b. 1898)
1982 Lester Bangs, American music journalist, author, and musician (b. 1949)
1983 George Balanchine, Russian born dancer and choreographer (b. 1904)
1983 Muddy Waters, American musician (b. 1915)
1985 Charles Francis Richter, American seismologist
1989 Yi, Bang ja, Crown Princess of Korea (b. 1901)
1989 Sergio Leone, Italian filmmaker (b. 1929)
1994 Roland Ratzenberger, Austrian race car driver (b. 1960)
1998 Nizar Qabbani, Syrian poet (b. 1926)
2002 Charlotte von Mahlsdorf, founder of the Gr nderzeit Museum in Berlin Mahlsdorf. (b. 1928)
2003 Peter 'Possum' Bourne, New Zealand race car driver (B. 1956)
2003 Wim van Est, Dutch cyclist (b. 1923)
2003 Mark Berger, University of Kentucky Professor
2005 Ron Todd, TGWU General Secretary (1985 1992) (b. 1927)
Holidays and observances
Scandinavia The arrival of spring, Walpurgis Night
Sweden Birthday of King Carl XVI Gustav, an official flag day
The Netherlands Queen's Day
Roman Empire third day of the Floralia in honor of Flora
Bealtaine Eve (From either Irish Bealtaine or Scottish Gaelic). Originally a Celtic Druid holiday
Vietnam Liberation Day
Feast day of the following saints in the Roman Catholic Church:
Saint Maximus, 3rd century martyr
Saint Louis, Amator, and Peter, martyred by the Moors in 855
Saint Marianus and James, martyrs in Numidia in 259
Suitbert the Younger (d. 807)
Catherine of Siena
Joseph Benedict Cottolengo
Pius V, pope
Robert
External links
March 30 March 31 April 29 May 1 May 30 May 31 listing of all days
ceb:Abril 30
nap:30 'e abbrile
war:Abril 30
pam:Abril 30
af:30 April
ar:30
an:30 d'abril
ast:30 d'abril
bg:30
be:30
bs:30. april
ca:30 d'abril
cv: , 30
co:30 d'aprile
cs:30. duben
cy:30 Ebrill
da:30. april
de:30. April
et:30. aprill
el:30
es:30 de abril
eo:30 a de aprilo
eu:Apirilaren 30
fo:30. apr l
fr:30 avril
fy:30 april
ga:30 Aibre n
gl:30 de abril
ko:4 30
hr:30. travnja
io:30 di aprilo
id:30 April
ia:30 de april
ie:30 april
is:30. apr l
it:30 aprile
he:30
jv:30 April
ka:30
csb:30 kwi ta
ku:30' avr l
la:30 Aprilis
lt:Baland io 30
lb:30. Abr ll
li:30 april
hu: prilis 30
mk:30
ms:30 April
nl:30 april
ja:4 30
no:30. april
nn:30. april
oc:30 d'abril
pl:30 kwietnia
pt:30 de Abril
ro:30 aprilie
ru:30
sco:30 Aprile
sq:30 Prill
scn:30 di aprili
simple:April 30
sk:30. apr l
sl:30. april
sr:30.
fi:30. huhtikuuta
sv:30 april
tl:Abril 30
tt:30. pril
te: 30
th:30
vi:30 th ng 4
tr:30 Nisan
uk:30
ur:30
wa:30 d' avri
zh:4 30
style "float:right "
'''August 22''' is the 234th day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar (235th in leap years), with 131 days remaining.
Events
1485 The Battle of Bosworth Field decisively ends the Wars of the Roses
1559 Bartholome de Carranza, Spanish archbishop, is arrested for heresy
1642 Charles I calls the English Parliament traitors. Beginning of the English Civil War
1654 Jacob Barsimson arrives in New Amsterdam. He is the first Jewish immigrant to what is later the United States
1717 Spanish troops land on Sardinia
1770 James Cook's expedition lands on the east coast of Australia
1775 King George III declares the American colonies to be in open rebellion
1780 James Cook's ship ''Resolution'' returns to England (Cook having been killed on Hawaii during the voyage)
1791 Beginning of the Haitian Slave Revolution in Saint Domingue
1798 French troops land in County Mayo, Ireland to aid Wolfe Tone's United Irishmen's Irish Rebellion
1846 The United States annexes New Mexico
1851 Gold is discovered in Australia
1851 The first America's Cup is won by the yacht ''America''.
1875 The Treaty of Saint Petersburg between Japan and Russia is ratified, providing for the exchange of Sakhalin for the Kuril Islands.
1864 Twelve nations sign the First Geneva Convention. The Red Cross is formed.
1901 Cadillac Motor Company founded
1902 Theodore Roosevelt became the first President of the United States to ride in an automobile
1910 Japan annexes Korea with the signing of the Japan Korea Annexation Treaty. The name Korea was abolished and replaced with the ancient name ''Joseon''.
1911 Theft of the ''Mona Lisa'' is discovered
1914 World War I: In Belgium, British and German troops clash for the first time in the war.
1922 Michael Collins, Commander in Chief of the Irish Free State Army is shot dead during an Anti Treaty ambush at Beal na mBlath, County Cork, during the Irish Civil War.
1926 Gold discovered in Johannesburg, South Africa
1941 World War II: German troops reach Leningrad, leading to the siege of Leningrad
1942 World War II: Brazil declares war on the Axis powers (Germany, Italy and Japan)
1944 World War II: Last transport of French Jews to concentration camps in Germany
1944 World War II: Thirty two Spaniards four French Maquis tackle a German column (1,300 men in 60 lorries, with 6 tanks 2 self propelled guns), at La Madeiline, France. Three Maquis are wounded, with 110 Germans killed and 200 wounded.
1950 Althea Gibson becomes the first black competitor in international tennis
1953 The jail on Devil's Island is closed
1962 An attempt to assassinate French president Charles De Gaulle fails
1962 The NS ''Savannah'', the world's first nuclear powered ship, completes its maiden voyage
1968 Pope Paul VI arrives in Bogot , Colombia. It is the first visit of a pope to Latin America
1972 Rhodesia is expelled by the IOC for its racist policies
1988 The Australian ''koala'', the first platinum coin, is issued
1989 The first ring of Neptune is discovered
1989 Nolan Ryan strikes out Rickey Henderson to become the first major league baseball pitcher to record 5000 strikeouts.
1992 FBI HRT sniper Lon Horiuchi shoots and kills Vicki Weaver during an 11 day siege at her home at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
2001 the Trojan room coffee pot is switched off for the last time.
2004 ''The Scream'', the painting by Edvard Munch, is stolen at gunpoint from a museum in Oslo, Norway.
Births
1601 Georges de Scud ry, French writer (d. 1667)
1624 Jean Renaud de Segrais, French writer (d. 1701)
1647 Denis Papin, French physicist, mathematician, and inventor
1679 Pierre Gu rin de Tencin, French cardinal (d. 1758)
1760 Pope Leo XII (d. 1829)
1764 Charles Percier, French architect (d. 1838)
1771 Henry Maudslay, English inventor and tool maker (d. 1831)
1800 William S. Harney, U.S. general (d. 1889)
1802 Gurdon Saltonstall Hubbard, American land speculator (d. 1886)
1834 Samuel Pierpont Langley, American astronomer, physicist, inventor, aviation pioneer (d. 1906)
1854 King Milan I of Serbia (d. 1901)
1860 Paul Nipkow, German inventor and television pioneer (d. 1940)
1862 Claude Debussy, French composer (d. 1918)
1867 Maximilian Bircher Benner, Swiss physician and nutritionist (d. 1939)
1873 Alexander Bogdanov, Russian physician and philosopher (d. 1928)
1874 Max Scheler, German philosopher (d. 1928)
1880 George Herriman, American cartoonist (d. 1944)
1893 Dorothy Parker, American writer (d. 1967)
1900 Sergei Ozhegov, Russian lexicographer (d. 1964)
1902 Leni Riefenstahl, German film director (d. 2003)
1904 Deng Xiaoping, leader of the People's Republic of China (d. 1997)
1908 Henri Cartier Bresson, French photographer (d. 2004)
1915 Hugh Paddick, British actor (d. 2000)
1915 Edward Szczepanik, Polish economist and Prime Minister in exile (d. 2005)
1917 John Lee Hooker, American guitarist and singer (d. 2001)
1920 Ray Bradbury, American writer
1920 Denton Cooley, American heart surgeon
1928 Karlheinz Stockhausen, German composer
1930 Gilmar, Brazilian football player
1934 Norman Schwarzkopf, U.S. general
1935 E. Annie Proulx, American author
1938 Paul Maguire, American football player
1939 George Reinholt, American actor
1939 Carl Yastrzemski, baseball player
1940 Valerie Harper, American actress
1941 Bill Parcells, American football coach
1942 Kathy Lennon, American singer (The Lennon Sisters)
1945 Ron Dante, American singer (The Archies), songwriter and record producer
1947 Cindy Williams, American actress
1955 Will Shetterly, writer
1955 Chiranjeevi, Telugu film actor
1956 Paul Molitor, baseball player
1957 Steve Davis, English snooker player
1958 Colm Feore, American born actor
1958 Vernon Reid, American musician (Living Colour)
1961 Roland Orzabal, singer and guitarist (Tears for Fears)
1963 Tori Amos, American singer, songwriter, and pianist
1964 Mats Wilander, Swedish tennis player
1966 GZA, American rapper
1967 Layne Staley, American musician (Alice in Chains) (d. 2002)
1967 Adewale Akinnuoye Agbaje, British actor
1970 Charlie Connelly, English writer
1973 Howie Dorough, American singer (Backstreet Boys)
1977 Heidar Helguson, Icelandic footballer
1978 Jeff Stinco, Canadian musician (Simple Plan)
1981 Alex Holmes, American football player
Deaths
408 Stilicho, Roman general (b. 359)
1155 Emperor Konoe of Japan (b. 1139)
1188 King Ferdinand II of Leon
1241 Pope Gregory IX
1280 Pope Nicholas III
1286 Erik V Klipping, King of Denmark (murdered) (b. 1249)
1304 John II, Count of Hainaut (b. 1247)
1350 King Philip VI of France (b. 1293)
1485 King Richard III of England (killed in battle) (b. 1452)
1553 John Dudley, English admiral and politician (beheaded) (b. 1501)
1584 Jan Kochanowski, Polish writer (b. 1530)
1599 Beatrice Cenci, Italian noblewoman who conspired to murder her father (b. 1577)
1599 Luca Marenzio, Italian composer
1607 Bartholomew Gosnold, English explorer and privateer (b. 1572)
1609 Maharal of Prague, Jewish mystic and philosopher (b. 1525)
1652 Jacob De la Gardie, Swedish soldier and statesman (b. 1583)
1680 John George II, Elector of Saxony (b. 1613)
1701 John Granville, 1st Earl of Bath, English royalist statesman (b. 1628)
1711 Louis Fran ois, duc de Boufflers, French marshal (b. 1644)
1752 William Whiston, English mathematician (b. 1667)
1793 Louis, 4th duc de Noailles, Marshal of France (b. 1713)
1797 Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser, Alsatian born Austrian general (b. 1724)
1806 Jean Honor Fragonard, French artist (b. 1732)
1818 Warren Hastings, British Governor General of India (b. 1732)
1823 Lazare Carnot, French general, politician, and mathematician (b. 1753)
1828 Franz Joseph Gall, Austrian neuroscientist (b. 1758)
1850 Nikolaus Lenau, Austrian poet (b. 1802)
1861 Xianfeng, Emperor of China (b. 1831)
1891 Jan Neruda, Czech author (b. 1834)
1903 Robert Gascoyne Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1830)
1904 Kate Chopin, American author (b. 1851)
1913 Bruno Pontecorvo, Italian physicist (d. 1993)
1918 Korbinian Brodmann, German neurologist (b. 1868)
1922 Michael Collins, Irish revolutionary (ambushed) (b. 1890)
1926 Charles W. Eliot, American President of Harvard University (b. 1834)
1942 Michel Fokine, Russian choreographer and dancer (b. 1880)
1953 Jim Tabor, baseball player (b. 1916)
1958 Roger Martin du Gard, French writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1881)
1976 Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira, President of Brazil (b. 1902)
1977 Sebastian Cabot, English born actor (b. 1918)
1978 Jomo Kenyatta, first Prime Minister of Kenya
1989 Huey P. Newton, American activist (b. 1942)
1991 Colleen Dewhurst, Canadian actress (b. 1924)
2003 Arnold Gerschwiler, Swiss born figure skating trainer (b. 1914)
2004 Konstantin Aseev, Russian chess player (b. 1960)
2005 Luc Ferrari, French composer (b. 1929)
Holidays and observances
RC feasts Mary queen of angels
External links
August 21 August 23 July 22 September 22 listing of all days
ilo:Agosto 22
af:22 Augustus
ar:22
an:22 d'agosto
ast:22 d'agostu
bg:22
be:22
bs:22. august
ca:22 d'agost
ceb:Agosto 22
cv: , 22
co:22 d'aostu
cs:22. srpen
cy:22 Awst
da:22. august
de:22. August
et:22. august
el:22
es:22 de agosto
eo:22 a de a gusto
eu:Abuztuaren 22
fo:22. august
fr:22 ao t
fy:22 augustus
ga:22 L nasa
gl:22 de agosto
ko:8 22
hr:22. kolovoza
io:22 di agosto
id:22 Agustus
ia:22 de augusto
ie:22 august
is:22. g st
it:22 agosto
he:22
jv:22 Agustus
ka:22
csb:22 z lnika
ku:22' gelaw j
la:22 Augusti
lt:Rugpj io 22
lb:22. August
li:22 augustus
hu:Augusztus 22
mk:22
ms:22 Ogos
nap:22 'e a sto
nl:22 augustus
ja:8 22
no:22. august
nn:22. august
oc:22 d'agost
pl:22 sierpnia
pt:22 de Agosto
ro:22 august
ru:22
sco:22 August
sq:22 Gusht
scn:22 di austu
simple:August 22
sk:22. august
sl:22. avgust
sr:22.
fi:22. elokuuta
sv:22 augusti
tl:Agosto 22
tt:22. August
te: 22
th:22
vi:22 th ng 8
tr:22 A ustos
uk:22
wa:22 d' awousse
war:Agosto 22
zh:8 22
pam:Agostu 22
style "float:right "
'''August 27''' is the 239th day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar (240th in leap years), with 126 days remaining.
Events
479 BC Greco Persian Wars: Persian forces led by Mardonius are routed by Pausanias, the Spartan commander of the Greek army in the Battle of Plataea. Along the with the Greek victory on the same day in the Battle of Mycale, the Persian invasion of Greece ended.
55 BC Julius Caesar lands in Britain for the first time.
410 Visigoth sack of Rome ends after three days.
1232 The Formulary of Adjudications is promulgated by Regent Hojo Yasutoki. (Traditional Japanese date: August 10, 1232)
1776 Battle of Long Island, in present day Brooklyn, New York, British forces under General William Howe defeat Americans under General George Washington
1813 Napoleon defeats the Austrians, Russians and Prussians at the Battle of Dresden
1828 The Russians defeat the Turks at Akhaltzikke.
1859 Petroleum discovered in Titusville, Pennsylvania. World's first successful oil well.
1861 Union forces attack Cape Hatteras, North Carolina
1883 Krakatoa, an Indonesian volcano, erupts. It is one of the most violent volcanic events in modern times.
1896 Anglo Zanzibar War: the shortest war in world history (9:02 to 9:40) between the United Kingdom and Zanzibar.
1900 British defeat Boer commandos at Bergendal
1928 Kellogg Briand Pact, outlawing war, signed by sixty nations
1937 The automobile division of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works is spun off into the Toyota Motor Corporation.
1939 First jet aircraft flight
1952 Reparation negotiations between West Germany and Israel end in Luxembourg West Germany to pay 3 billion Deutschmarks.
1962 Mariner 2 launched
1969 The first installment of the ''Otoko wa Tsurai yo'' (''It's Tough Being a Man'') movies is released in Japan. Director and screenplay writer Yoji Yamada went on to make 48 installments of the series, which is recognized in the Guinness Book of World Records as the longest running movie series.
1979 An IRA bomb kills Lord Mountbatten and 3 others on holiday in Sligo, Republic of Ireland. Another near Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland kills 18 British soldiers.
1985 The Nigerian government is peacefully overthrown by Army Chief of Staff Maj. Gen. Ibrahim Babangida.
1990 The British Broadcasting Corporation launches BBC Radio Five Live at 9am GMT with a mixture of sports, news, and children's programming. The station broadcasts for eighteen hours per day.
1991 The European Community recognizes the independence of the Baltic states: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
1991 Moldova declares independence from the USSR.
1993 The Florida DOT decides to cease producing its distinctive colored U.S. Highway shields so that it can make use of Federal funds for those signs.
1993 The Rainbow Bridge, connecting Tokyo's Shibaura and the island of Odaiba, is completed.
2000 Ostankino Tower in Moscow catches fire, three people are killed.
2003 Mars makes its closest approach to Earth in nearly 60,000 years, passing approximately 34,646,416 miles (55,758,006 kilometers) from Earth.
Births
1407 Ashikaga Yoshikazu, Japanese shogun (d. 1425)
1471 George, Duke of Saxony (d. 1539)
1637 Charles Calvert, 3rd Baron Baltimore, Governor of the Province of Maryland (d. 1715)
1665 John Hervey, 1st Earl of Bristol, English politician (d. 1751)
1677 Otto Ferdinand Graf von Abensperg und Traun, Austrian field marshal (d. 1748)
1724 John Joachim Zubly, Swiss born Continental Congressman (d. 1781)
1730 Johann Georg Hamann, German philosopher (d. 1788)
1770 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, German philosopher (d. 1831)
1809 Hannibal Hamlin, Vice President of the United States of America (d. 1891)
1858 Giuseppe Peano, Italian mathematician (d. 1932)
1865 James Henry Breasted, American Egyptologist (d. 1935)
1865 Charles G. Dawes, 30th Vice President of the United States, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (d. 1951)
1870 Amado Nervo, Mexican poet (d. 1919)
1871 Theodore Dreiser, American author (d. 1945)
1874 Carl Bosch, German chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1940)
1875 Katharine McCormick, American women's rights activist (d. 1967)
1886 Rebecca Clarke, English composer and violist (d. 1979)
1886 Eric Coates, English composer (d. 1957)
1890 Man Ray, photographer and artist (d. 1976)
1899 C.S. Forester, British author (d. 1966)
1899 Byron Foulger, American character actor (d. 1970)
1904 Norah Lofts, British author (d. 1983)
1906 Ed Gein, American serial killer (d. 1984)
1908 Don Bradman, Australian cricketer (d. 2001)
1908 Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th President of the United States (d. 1973)
1908 Kurt Wegner, German artist (d. 1985)
1909 Lester Young, American musician (d. 1959)
1910 Mother Teresa, Albanian missionary and humanitarian, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (d. 1997)
1911 Kay Walsh, British actress (d. 2005)
1915 Norman F. Ramsey, American physicist, Nobel Prize laureate
1916 Martha Raye, American actress (d. 1994)
1921 Leo Penn, American film director actor (d. 1998)
1926 Kristen Nygaard, Norwegian mathematician, computer scientist, and politician (d. 2002)
1928 Mangosuthu Buthelezi, South African politician
1929 Ira Levin, American author
1932 Antonia Fraser, British author
1935 Frank Yablans, American film producer
1937 Tommy Sands, American actor and singer
1940 Sonny Sharrock, American jazz guitarist (d. 1994)
1942 B. J. Thomas, American singer
1943 Tuesday Weld, American actress
1945 G.W. Bailey, American actor
1947 Barbara Bach, American actress
1947 Harry Reems, American actor
1950 Charles Fleischer, American actor
1951 Buddy Bell, baseball player manager
1952 Paul "Pee Wee Herman" Reubens, American actor
1953 Peter Stormare, Swedish born actor
1954 Derek Warwick, British race car driver
1955 Diana Scarwid, American actress
1957 Bernhard Langer, German golfer
1958 Tom Lanoye, Belgian author
1958 Stalking Cat, American body modificationist
1959 Gerhard Berger, Austrian race car driver
1962 Adam Oates, Canadian ice hockey player
1963 Downtown Julie Brown, Welsh television personality
1965 Wayne James, Zimbabwe cricketer
1966 Juhan Parts, Prime Minister of Estonia
1969 Reece Shearsmith, British actor and comedian
1970 Peter Ebdon, English snooker player
1970 Tony Kanal, American British musician (No Doubt)
1970 Jim Thome, baseball player
1973 Dietmar Hamann, German footballer
1974 Jose Vidro, Puerto Rican Major League Baseball player
1974 , American Game Designer
1975 Jonny Moseley, American skier
1976 Sarah Chalke, Canadian actress
1976 Carlos Moya, Spanish tennis player
1976 Mark Webber, Australian race car driver
1977 Deco, Brazilian footballer
1979 Tian Liang, Chinese diver
1988 Alexa Vega, American actress
Deaths
1312 Arthur II, Duke of Brittany (b. 1262)
1394 Chokei, Emperor of Japan (b. 1343)
1450 Reginald West, 6th Baron De La Warr, English politician (b. 1395)
1521 Josquin Des Prez, Flemish composer
1545 Piotr Gamrat, Polish Catholic archbishop (b. 1487)
1572 Claude Goudimel, French composer
1577 Titian, Italian artist
1590 Pope Sixtus V (b. 1521)
1635 F lix Lope de Vega, Spanish poet and playwright (b. 1562)
1664 Francisco Zurbar n, Spanish painter (b. 1598)
1748 James Thomson, Scottish poet (b. 1700)
1773 Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz, Prussian general (b. 1721)
1875 William Chapman Ralston, American banker (b. 1826)
1909 Emil Christian Hansen, Danish fermentation physiologist (b. 1842)
1929 Herman Potonik Noordung, Slovenian rocket scientist (b. 1892)
1931 Frank Harris, Irish author and editor (b. 1856)
1931 Francis Marion Smith, American borax magnate (b. 1846)
1948 Charles Evans Hughes, U.S. Supreme Court justice (b. 1862)
1958 Ernest Lawrence, American physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1901)
1963 Garrett Morgan, American inventor (b. 1877)
1963 W.E.B. DuBois, American civil rights activist and scholar (b. 1868)
1964 Gracie Allen, American actress and comedienne
1965 Le Corbusier, Swiss architect (b. 1887)
1967 Brian Epstein, English manager of The Beatles (b. 1934)
1968 Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent (b. 1906)
1969 Ivy Compton Burnett, English novelist (b. 1884)
1969 Erika Mann, German writer and daughter of Thomas Mann (b. 1905)
1971 Bennett Cerf, American publisher and television personality (b. 1898)
1975 Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia (b. 1892)
1976 Mukesh, Indian playback singer (b. 1923)
1979 Earl Mountbatten, British admiral and statesman (assassinated) (b. 1900)
1980 Douglas Kenney, American humorist (b. 1947)
1988 William Sargant, British psychiatrist (b. 1907)
1990 Stevie Ray Vaughan, American guitarist (b. 1954)
1997 Brandon Tartikoff, American television producer (b. 1949)
2002 Richard Ricci, American handyman wrongly suspected of being a kidnapper in the Elizabeth Smart case (b. 1953)
2003 Pierre Poujade, French politician (b. 1920)
2004 Willie Crawford, baseball player (b. 1946)
Holidays and observances
Roman festivals Volturnalia held in honor of Volturnus
RC Saints Saint Monica of Hippo
Moldova Independence Day (from the USSR, 1991)
External links
August 26 August 28 July 27 September 27 listing of all days
af:27 Augustus
ar:27
an:27 d'agosto
ast:27 d'agostu
bg:27
be:27
bs:27. august
ca:27 d'agost
ceb:Agosto 27
cv: , 27
co:27 d'aostu
cs:27. srpen
cy:27 Awst
da:27. august
de:27. August
et:27. august
el:27
es:27 de agosto
eo:27 a de a gusto
eu:Abuztuaren 27
fo:27. august
fr:27 ao t
fy:27 augustus
ga:27 L nasa
gl:27 de agosto
ko:8 27
hr:27. kolovoza
io:27 di agosto
id:27 Agustus
ia:27 de augusto
ie:27 august
is:27. g st
it:27 agosto
he:27
jv:27 Agustus
ka:27
csb:27 z lnika
ku:27' gelaw j
lt:Rugpj io 27
lb:27. August
hu:Augusztus 27
mk:27
ms:27 Ogos
nap:27 'e a sto
nl:27 augustus
ja:8 27
no:27. august
nn:27. august
oc:27 d'agost
pl:27 sierpnia
pt:27 de Agosto
ro:27 august
ru:27
sco:27 August
sq:27 Gusht
scn:27 di austu
simple:August 27
sk:27. august
sl:27. avgust
sr:27.
fi:27. elokuuta
sv:27 augusti
tl:Agosto 27
tt:27. August
te: 27
th:27
vi:27 th ng 8
tr:27 A ustos
uk:27
wa:27 d' awousse
war:Agosto 27
zh:8 27
pam:Agostu 27
:''This article is about organic compounds containing OH groups. For other uses, see Alcohol (disambiguation).''
In chemistry, '''alcohol''' is any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group ('' OH'') is bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and or carbon atoms. The general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is '''Csubn subHsub2n 1 subOH'''.
In general usage, '''alcohol''' refers almost always to ethanol, also known as '''grain alcohol''', and often to any beverage that contains ethanol (see ''alcoholic beverage''). This sense underlies the term alcoholism (addiction to alcohol). As a drug, ethanol is known to have a depressing effect that decreases the responses of the central nervous system (see effects of alcohol on the body). Other forms of alcohol are usually described with a clarifying adjective, as in ''isopropyl alcohol'' or by the suffix '' ol'', as in ''isopropanol''.
The word dates to the 16th century when it was used to refer to any chemical substance arrived at by sublimation. This derived from the Medieval Latin ''alcohol'' ("powdered ore of antimony"), originating from Arabic '''' (), which is also the source of ''kohl'' and related to the root ''k l'', attested in the Arabic word for eye makeup.
Structure
The functional group of an alcohol is a hydroxyl group bonded to an sp hybridized carbon. It can therefore be regarded as a derivative of water, with an alkyl group replacing one of the hydrogens. If an aryl group is present rather than an alkyl, the compound is generally called a phenol rather than an alcohol. Also, if the hydroxyl group is bonded to one of the sp hybridized carbons of an alkenyl group, the compound is referred to as an enol. The oxygen in an alcohol has a bond angle of around 109 (c.f. 104.5 in water), and two nonbonded electron pairs. The O H bond in methanol (CHsub3 subOH) is around 96 picometres long.
Primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols
There are three major subsets of alcohols 'primary' (1 ), 'secondary' (2 ) and 'tertiary' (3 ), based upon the number of carbons the C OH carbon (shown in red) is bonded to. Methanol is the simplest 'primary' alcohol. The simplest secondary alcohol is isopropanol (propan 2 ol), and a simple tertiary alcohol is ''tert'' butanol (2 methylpropan 2 ol).
Methanol ethanol
The simplest and most commonly used alcohols are methanol and ethanol (common names methyl alcohol and ethyl alcohol, respectively), which have the structures shown above.
Methanol was formerly obtained by the distillation of wood, and was called "wood alcohol". It is now a cheap commodity chemical produced by the high pressure reaction of carbon monoxide with hydrogen. In common usage, "alcohol" often refers simply to ethanol or "grain alcohol". Methylated spirits ("Meths"), also called "surgical spirits", is a form of ethanol rendered undrinkable by the addition of methanol. Aside from its major use in alcoholic beverages, ethanol is also used (though highly controlled) as an industrial solvent and raw material.
Uses
Alcohols are in wide use in industry and science as reagents, solvents, and fuels. Ethanol and methanol can be made to burn more cleanly than gasoline or diesel. Because of its low toxicity and ability to dissolve non polar substances, ethanol is often used as a solvent in medical drugs, perfumes, and vegetable essences such as vanilla. In organic synthesis, alcohols frequently serve as versatile intermediates.
Ethanol is also commonly used in beverages after fermentation to promote flavor or induce a euphoric intoxication commonly known as "drunkenness" or "being drunk". The use of ethanol for this purpose is illegal in some jurisdictions. In such instances of consumption, alcohol is a drug, with immediate potential for overdose, toxic poisoning, and physiological dependency (known as alcoholism). Alcoholism has become one of the most common drug addictions (if not second to caffeine) in the world. The physiological dependency caused by alcoholism means that the user experiences physical withdrawal (in the form of a headache known as a "hangover," extremely high anxiety known as "the shakes," and restlessness or trouble sleeping) upon cessation or decrease of use. For the full article on this topic see effects of alcohol on the body.
Because of such particular uses, historically, ethanol has been regulated by taxation. Those who manufacture it for other purposes often avoid this expense by "denaturing" it in a manner that renders it unfit for drinking. A common way to do this is by the addition of denatonium benzoate. "SD 40" and "SD Alcohol" sometimes followed by "40 B" are designations that were established by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms for this formulation.
Sources
Many alcohols can be created by fermentation of fruits or grains with yeast, but only ethanol is commercially produced this way, chiefly for fuel and drink. Other alcohols are generally produced by synthetic routes from natural gas, petroleum, or coal feed stocks, for example via acid catalyzed hydration of alkenes. For more details see Chemistry of alcohols
Nomenclature
Systematic names
In the IUPAC system, the name of the alkane chain loses the terminal "e" and adds "ol", e.g. "methanol" and "ethanol". When necessary, the position of the hydroxyl group is indicated by a number between the alkane name and the "ol": propan 1 ol for CHsub3 subCHsub2 subCHsub2 subOH, propan 2 ol for CHsub3 subCH(OH)CHsub3 sub. Sometimes, the position number is written before the IUPAC name: 1 propanol and 2 propanol. If a higher priority group is present (such as an aldehyde, ketone or carboxylic acid), then it is necessary to use the prefix "hydroxy", for example: 1 hydroxy 2 propanone (CHsub3 subCOCHsub2 subOH).
Some examples of simple alcohols and how to name them:
Common names for alcohols usually take the name of the corresponding alkyl group and add the word "alcohol", e.g. methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol or ''tert'' butyl alcohol. Propyl alcohol may be ''n'' propyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol depending on whether the hydroxyl group is bonded to the 1st or 2nd carbon on the propane chain. Isopropyl alcohol is also occasionally called ''sec'' propyl alcohol.
As mentioned above alcohols are classified as primary (1 ), secondary (2 ) or tertiary (3 ), and common names often indicate this in the alkyl group prefix. For example (CHsub3 sub)sub3 subCOH is a tertiary alcohol is commonly known as ''tert'' butyl alcohol. This would be named 2 methylpropan 2 ol under IUPAC rules, indicating a propane chain with methyl and hydroxyl groups both attached to the middle ( 2) carbon.
An alcohol with two hydroxyl groups is commonly called a "glycol", e.g. HO CHsub2 sub CHsub2 sub OH is ethylene glycol. The IUPAC name is ethane 1,2 diol, "diol" indicating two hydroxyl groups, and 1,2 indicating their bonding positions. Geminal glycols (with the two hydroxyls on the same carbon atom), such as ethane 1,1 diol, are generally unstable. For three or four groups, "triol" and "tetraol" are used.
Etymology
The word "alcohol" almost certainly comes from the Arabic language (the "al " prefix being the Arabic definite article) however, the precise origin is unclear. It was introduced into Europe, together with the art of distillation and the substance itself, around the 12th century by various European authors who translated and popularized the discoveries of Islamic alchemists.
A popular theory, found in many dictionaries, is that it comes from ''ALKHL'' ''al kuhul'', originally the name of very finely powdered antimony sulfide Sbsub2 subSsub3 sub used as an antiseptic and eyeliner. The powder is prepared by sublimation of the natural mineral stibnite in a closed vessel. According to this theory, the meaning of ''alkuhul'' would have been first extended to distilled substances in general, and then narrowed to ethanol. This conjectured etymology has been circulating in England since 1672 at least (OED).
However, this derivation is suspicious since the current Arabic name for alcohol, ''ALKHWL'' ''al???'', does not derive from ''al kuhul''. The Qur'an in verse 37:47 uses the word ''ALGhWL'' ''al ghawl'' properly meaning "spirit" ("spiritual being") or "demon" with the sense "the thing that gives the wine its headiness". The word ''al ghawl'' also originated the English word "ghoul", and the name of the star Algol. This derivation would, of course, be consistent with the use of "spirit" or "spirit of wine" as synonymous of "alcohol" in most Western languages. (Incidentally, the etymology "alcohol" "the devil" was used in the 1930s by the U.S. Temperance Movement for propaganda purposes.)
According to the second theory, the popular etymology and the spelling "alcohol" would not be due to generalization of the meaning of ''ALKHL'', but rather to Western alchemists and authors confusing the two words ''ALKHL'' and ''ALGhWL'', which have indeed been transliterated in many different and overlapping ways.
Physical and chemical properties
The hydroxyl group generally makes the alcohol molecule polar. Those groups can form hydrogen bonds to one another and to other compounds. Two opposing solubility trends in alcohols are: the tendency of the polar OH to promote solubility in water, and of the carbon chain to resist it. Thus, methanol, ethanol, and propanol are miscible in water because the hydroxyl group wins out over the short carbon chain. Butanol, with a four carbon chain, is moderately soluble because of a balance between the two trends. Alcohols of five or more carbons (Pentanol and higher) are effectively insoluble because of the hydrocarbon chain's dominance.
Because of hydrogen bonding, alcohols tend to have higher boiling points than comparable hydrocarbons and ethers. All simple alcohols are miscible in organic solvents. This hydrogen bonding means that alcohols can be used as protic solvents.
The lone pairs of electrons on the oxygen of the hydroxyl group also makes alcohols nucleophiles.
Alcohols, like water, can show either acidic or basic properties at the O H group. With a pKSuba sub of around 16 19 they are generally slightly weaker acids than water, but they are still able to react with strong bases such as sodium hydride or reactive metals such as sodium. The salts that result are called '''alkoxides''', with the general formula ROsup sup Msup sup.
Alcohols conjugated to aromatic rings have a lower pKa (around 10). Electron withdrawing groups also work to make alcohols more acidic. For example, Para nitro phenol has a pKa of 7.15.
Meanwhile the oxygen atom has lone pairs of nonbonded electrons that render it weakly basic in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid. For example, with methanol:
Alcohols can also undergo oxidation to give aldehydes, ketones or carboxylic acids, or they can be dehydrated to alkenes. They can react to form ester compounds, and they can (if activated first) undergo nucleophilic substitution reactions. For more details see the Chemistry of alcohols section below.
Toxicity
Alcohols often have an odor described as 'biting' that 'hangs' in the nasal passages. Ethanol in the form of alcoholic beverages has been consumed by humans since pre historic times, for a variety of hygienic, dietary, medicinal, religious, and recreational reasons. While infrequent consumption of ethanol in small quantities may be harmless or even beneficial, larger doses result in a state known as drunkenness or intoxication and, depending on the dose and regularity of use, can cause acute respiratory failure or death and with chronic use has medical repercussions.
Other alcohols are substantially more poisonous than ethanol, partly because they take much longer to be metabolized, and often their metabolism produces even more toxic substances. Methanol, or ''wood alcohol'', for instance, is oxidized by alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes in the liver to the poisonous formaldehyde, which can cause blindness or death.
An effective treatment to prevent formaldehyde toxicity after methanol ingestion is to administer ethanol. This will bind to alcohol dehydrogenase, preventing methanol from binding and thus acting as a substrate. Any formaldehyde will be converted to formic acid and excreted before it causes damage.
Preparation of alcohols
Laboratory
Several methods exist for the preparation of alcohols in the laboratory.
Primary Alkyl halides react with aqueous NaOH or KOH mainly to primary alcohols in nucleophilic aliphatic substitution. (Secondary and especially tertiary alkyl halides will give the elimination (alkene) product instead).
Aldehydes or ketones are reduced with sodium borohydride or lithium aluminium hydride. (after an acidic workup)
Alkenes engage in a acid catalysed hydration reaction using concentrated sulfuric acid as a catalyst which gives usually secondary or tertiary alcohols.
The hydroboration oxidation and oxymercuration reduction of alkenes are more reliable in organic synthesis.
Grignard reagents react with carbonyl groups to secondary and tertiary alcohols
The formation of a secondary alcohol via reduction and hydratation is shown:
Industrial
Industrially alcohols are produced in several ways.
by fermentation using glucose produced from sugar from the hydrolysis of starch, in the presence of yeast and temperature of less than 37 C to produce ethanol. For instance the conversion of invertase to glucose and fructose or the conversion of glucose to zymase and ethanol.
By direct hydration: using ethene or other alkenes from cracking of fractions of distilled crude oil. Uses a catalyst of phosphoric acid under high temperature and pressure.
Methanol is producted from water gas: It is manufactured from synthesis gas, where carbon monoxide and 2 equivalents of hydrogen gas are combined to produce methanol using a copper, zinc oxide and aluminium oxide catalyst at 250 C and a pressure of 50 100 atm.
Reactions of alcohols
Deprotonation
Alcohols can behave as weak acids, undergoing deprotonation. The deprotonation reaction to produce an alkoxide salt is either performed with a strong base such as sodium hydride or ''n'' butyllithium, or with sodium or potassium metal.
: 2 R OH 2 NaH 2 R Osup supNasup sup Hsub2 sub
: 2 R OH 2Na 2R Osup supNasup sup
: e.g. 2 CHsub3 subCHsub2 sub OH 2 Na 2 CHsub3 sub CHsub2 sub Osup supNasup sup
Water is similar in pKSuba sub to many alcohols, so with sodium hydroxide there is an equilibrium set up which usually lies to the left:
: R OH NaOH R Osup supNasup sup Hsub2 subO (equilibrium to the left)
It should be noted, though, that the bases used to deprotonate alcohols are strong themselves. The bases used and the alkoxides created are both highly moisture sensitive chemical reagents.
Nucleophilic substitution
The OH group is not a good leaving group in nucleophilic substitution reactions, so neutral alcohols do not react in such reactions. However if the oxygen is first protonated to give ROHsub2 subsup sup, the leaving group (water) is much more stable, and nucleophilic substitution can take place. For instance, tertiary alcohols react with hydrochloric acid to produce tertiary alkyl halides, where the hydroxyl group is replaced by a chlorine atom. If primary or secondary alcohols are to be reacted with hydrochloric acid, an activator such as zinc chloride is needed. Alternatively the conversion may be performed directly using thionyl chloride.sup 1 sup
Alcohols may likewise be converted to alkyl bromides using hydrobromic acid or phosphorus tribromide, for example:
: 3 R OH PBrsub3 sub 3 RBr Hsub3 subPOsub3 sub
In the Barton McCombie deoxygenation an alcohol is deoxygenated to an alkane with tributyltin hydride or a trimethylborane water complex in a radical substitution reaction.
Dehydration
Alcohols are themselves nucleophilic, so ROHsub2 subsup sup can react with ROH to produce ethers and water in a dehydration reaction, although this reaction is rarely used except in the manufacture of diethyl ether.
More useful is the E1 elimination reaction of alcohols to produce alkenes. The reaction generally obeys Zaitsev's Rule, which states that the most stable (usually the most substituted) alkene is formed. Tertiary alcohols eliminate easily at just above room temperature, but primary alcohols requre a higher temperature.
This is a diagram of acid catalysed dehydration of ethanol to produce ethene:
550px
Esterification
To form an ester from an alcohol and a carboxylic acid the reaction, known as Fischer esterification, is usually performed at reflux with a catalyst of concentrated sulfuric acid:
: R OH R' COOH math Leftrightarrow math R' COOR Hsub2 subO
In order to drive the equilibrium to the right and produce a good yield of ester, water is usually removed, either by an excess of Hsub2 subSOsub4 sub or by using a Dean Stark apparatus. Esters may also be prepared by reaction of the alcohol with an acid chloride in the presence of a base such as pyridine.
Other types of ester are prepared similarly for example tosyl (tosylate) esters are made by reaction of the alcohol with p toluenesulfonyl chloride in pyridine.
Oxidation
Primary alcohols generally give aldehydes or carboxylic acids upon oxidation, while secondary alcohols give ketones. Traditionally strong oxidants such as the dichromate ion or potassium permanganate are used, under acidic conditions, for example:
:3 CHsub3 sub CH( OH) CHsub3 sub Ksub2 subCrsub2 subOsub7 sub 4 Hsub2 subSOsub4 sub 3 CHsub3 sub C( O) CHsub3 sub Crsub2 sub(SOsub4 sub)sub3 sub Ksub2 subSOsub4 sub 7 Hsub2 subO
Frequently in aldehyde preparations these reagents cause a problem of over oxidation to the carboxylic acid. To avoid this, other reagents such as PCC, Dess Martin periodinane, 2 Iodoxybenzoic acid, TPAP or methods such as Swern oxidation are now preferred.
Alcohols with a methyl group attached to the alcohol carbon can also undergo a haloform reaction (such as the iodoform reaction) in the presence of the halogen and a base such as sodium hydroxide.
Tertiary alcohols resist oxidation, but can be oxidised by reagents such as 2,3 dichloro 5,6 dicyano 1,4 benzoquinone.
See also
Alcohol as a fuel
Alcoholic beverage
Effects of alcohol on the body
Transesterification
Sugar alcohols
Fatty alcohols
References
External links
Interesting information about alcohols.
Category:Drugs
Category:Antiseptics
Category:Arabic words
Category:functional groups
ar: ( )
bg:
be:
ca:Alcohol
cs:Alkohol
da:Alkanol
de:Alkohol (Chemie)
et:Alkoholid
es:Alcohol
eo:Alkoholo
fr:Alcool (chimie)
gl:Alcohol
ko:
id:Alkohol
io:Alkoholo
is:Alk h l
it:Alcoli
he:
hu:Alkohol
mk:
nl:Alcohol (scheikunde)
ja:
no:Alkohol
nn:Alkohol
pl:Alkohol
pt: lcool
ru:
simple:Alcohol
sk:Alkohol
sl:Alkohol
sr:
su:alkohol
fi:Alkoholi
tr:alkoller
vi:R u (ho h c)
zh:
'''Achill Island''' ''(Irish Acaill, Oile n Acla)'' in County Mayo is the largest island off Ireland, and is situated off the west coast. It has a population of 2700. Its area is 57 square miles (146 square kilometres). Achill is attached to the mainland by Michael Davitt Bridge, between the villages of Achill Sound and Polranny, so it is possible to drive onto the island. This is a swing bridge which allows the passage of small boats. A bridge was first completed here in 1886, and replaced by the current structure after World War II. Other centres of population include the villages of Keel, Dooagh, Dooega and Dugort. The island's football pitch and two secondary schools are on the mainland at Polranny. Early settlements are believed to have been established on Achill around 3000 BCE. A paddle dating from this period was found at the crannog near Dookinella.
The island is 87 per cent peat bog. The parish of Achill also includes the Corraun peninsula. The people of Corraun consider themselves Achill people, and most natives of Achill refer to this area as being "in Achill". In the summer of 1996, the RNLI decided to station a lifeboat at Kildownet.
History
It is believed that at the end of the Neolithic Period (around 4000 BCE), Achill had a population of 500 1000 people. The island would have been mostly forest until the Neolithic people began crop cultivation. Settlememt increased during the Iron Age, and the dispersal of small forts around the coast indicate the warlike nature of the times. Granuaile maintained a castle at Kildownet in the sixteenth century.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there was much migration to Achill from other parts of Ireland, particularly Ulster, due to the political and religious turmoil of the time. For a while there were two different dialects of Irish being spoken on Achill. This led to many townlands being recorded as having two names during the 1824 Ordnace Survey, and some maps today give different names for the same place. Achill Irish still has many traces of Ulster Irish.
Sights
Despite some unsympathetic development, the island retains some striking natural beauty. The cliffs of Croaghaun on the northern coast of the island are the highest sea cliffs in Europe but are inaccessible by road. On the western tip near Achill Head, Keem bay is arguably one of the most beautiful beaches on the Irish west coast. Keel beach is quite popular with tourists and some locals as a surfing location. Another extreme point of the island is Moytoge Head, which with its rounded appearance drops dramatically down to the ocean. An old British observation post, built during World War I to prevent the Germans landing arms for the Irish Republican Army separatist movement, is still standing on Moytoge. The mountain Slievemore (671 metres) rises dramatically in the centre of the island and the Atlantic drive (along the south west of the island) has some dramatically beautiful views. On the slopes of Slievemore, there is an abandoned village ("The Deserted Village") The Deserted Village at Slievemore was once thought to be a remnant village from An Gorta M r (The Great Hunger, see Great Famine). However, recent developments suggest that it is a Booley. Specifically, the people of Dooagh and Pollagh would migrate in the summer to Slievemore (Transhumance), and then go back to Dooagh in the fall. Just west of the deserted village is an old Martello tower, again built by the British to warn of any possible French invasion. The area also boasts an approximately 5000 year old Neolithic tomb. Achillbeg (''Acaill Beag'', Little Achill) is a small island just off Achill's southern tip. Its inhabitants were resettled on Achill in the 1960's. There is a mural of a surfer on the gable of a pub in Cashel.
Economy
While a number of attempts at setting up small industrial units on the island have been made, the economy of the island is largely dependent on tourism. Subventions from Achill people working abroad, in particular in England, Scotland and the United States allowed many families to remain living in Achill throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Since the advent of Ireland's "Celtic Tiger" economy fewer Achill people are forced to look for work abroad. Agriculture plays a small role and is only profitable because of European subsidies. The fact that the island is mostly bog means that it is limited largely to sheep farming. In the past, fishing was a significant activity but this aspect of the economy is small now. At one stage, the island was known for its shark fishing, basking shark in particular was fished for its valuable liver oil. There was a big spurt of growth in tourism in the 1960s and 1970s before which life was tough and difficult on the island. Since that heyday, the common perception is that tourism has been slowly declining.
Architecture
Some of the recent building development on the island (over the last 40 years or so) has been contentious and in many cases is not as sympathetic to the landscape as the earlier style of whitewashed barged roofed cottages. Because of the inhospitable climate, very few houses date from before the twentieth century. An example of the style of earlier housing can be seen in the "Deserted Village" ruins near the graveyard at the foot of Slievemore. Even the houses in this village represent a relatively comfortable class of dwelling as, even as recently as a hundred years ago, some people still used "Beehive" style houses (small circular single roomed dwellings with a hole in ceiling to let out smoke). Many of the oldest and most picturesque inhabitated cottages date from the activities of the Congested Districts Board for Ireland a body set up around the turn of the twentieth century in Ireland to improve the welfare for inhabitants of small villages and towns. Most of the homes in Achill at the time were very small and tightly packed together in villages. The CDB subsidised the building of new, more spacious (though still small by modern standards) homes outside of the traditional villages.
Famous people
The artist Paul Henry stayed on the island for a number of years in the early 1900s and some of his most famous paintings are of the dramatic landscape of the island. The Nobel Prize winning author, Heinrich B ll, visited the island and wrote of his experience in his "Irish Journal" (''Irisches Tagebuch''). The B lls later bought a cottage near Dugort and lived in it periodically until 2001 when they donated it to be used as an artists' residence. Graham Greene also spent time on Achill Island.
See also
Connacht Irish
External links
Category:Islands of Ireland
da:Achill Island
de:Achill Island
fr: le d'Achill
ga:Acaill
gl:Achill Acaill
it:Achill Island
'''Irwin Allen Ginsberg''' () (June 3, 1926 April 5 1997) was an American Beat poet born in Newark, New Jersey. Ginsberg is best known for Howl (1956), a long poem about consumer society's negative human values.
Life
Ginsberg was born on June 3, 1926 into a Jewish family in Newark, New Jersey. His father Louis Ginsberg was a poet and his mother was a high school teacher. Ginsberg's mother, Naomi Levy Ginsberg (who was affected by epileptic seizures and mental illnesses such as paranoia ) was also an active member of the Communist Party USA and often took Ginsberg and his brother Eugene to party meetings. Ginsberg later said that his mother "Made up bedtime stories that all went something like: 'The good king rode forth from his castle, saw the suffering workers and healed them.'"
As a teenager, Ginsberg began to write letters to ''The New York Times'' about political issues such as World War II and workers' rights. When he was a junior in high school, he accompanied his mother by bus to her therapist. The trip disturbed Ginsberg and he later described it, along with his relationship with his mother, in his long autobiographical poem ''''Kaddish for Naomi Ginsberg (1894 1956).''
In 1943 Ginsberg graduated from high school and briefly attended Montclair State University before entering Columbia University on a scholarship from the Young Men's Hebrew Association of Paterson. (1949). In his freshman year he met fellow undergraduate Lucien Carr, who introduced him to a number of future Beat writers including Jack Kerouac, William S. Burroughs, and John Clellon Holmes. Carr also introduced Ginsberg to Neal Cassady, one of the many that Ginsberg loved. Kerouac later described the meeting between Ginsberg and Cassady in the first chapter of his 1957 novel ''On the Road.''
In 1954 Ginsberg met Peter Orlovsky, a young man of 21 with whom he fell in love and who remained his life long lover, and with whom he eventually shared his interest in Tibetan Buddhism. Later in his life, Ginsberg formed a bridge between the Beat movement of the 1950s and the hippies of the 1960s, befriending, among others, Timothy Leary, Gregory Corso, Bob Kaufman, Herbert Huncke, Rod McKuen, and Bob Dylan.
In 1965 Ginsberg was deported from Cuba for for publicaly protesting against Cuba's anti marijuana stance and its penchant for throwing homosexuals in jail.
The Cubans sent him to Czechoslovakia, Where one week after being named the King of a May Day parade, Ginsberg was labeled an "immoral menace" by the Czech government and deported.
In 1982, he was featured on "Ghetto Defendant", a song by The Clash, on their album "Combat Rock". Ginsberg died of cancer on April 5, 1997.
Career
Ginsberg's poetry was strongly influenced by modernism, romanticism, the beat and cadence of jazz, and his Kagyu Buddhist practice and Jewish background. He considered himself to have inherited the visionary and homoerotic poetic mantle handed from the English poet and artist William Blake on to Walt Whitman. The power of Ginsberg's verse, its searching, probing focus, its long and lilting lines, as well as its New World exuberance, all echo the continuity of inspiration which he claimed. Other influences included the American poet William Carlos Williams.
Ginsberg's principal work, "Howl", is well known to many for its opening line: "I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness". It was considered scandalous at the time of publication due to the rawness of the language, which is frequently explicit. Shortly after its 1956 publication by San Francisco's City Lights Bookstore, it was banned for obscenity. The ban became a cause c l bre among defenders of the First Amendment, and was later lifted after judge Clayton W. Horn declared the poem to possess redeeming social importance. Ginsberg's leftist and generally anti establishment politics attracted the attention of the FBI, who regarded Ginsberg as a major security threat.
Ginsberg's spiritual journey began early on with his reported spontaneous visions, and continued with an early trip to India and a chance encounter on a New York City street (they both tried to catch the same cab) with Ch gyam Trungpa, Rinpoche, a Tibetan Buddhist meditation master of the Vajrayana school, who became his friend and life long teacher. Ginsberg helped found the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado, a school founded by Ch gyam Trungpa, Rinpoche. Music and chanting were both important parts of his live delivery during poetry readings. He often accompanied himself on a handheld organ called a harmonium, and was often accompanied by a guitarist. Attendance to his poetry readings was generally standing room only for most of his career, no matter where in the world he appeared.
Ginsberg won the National Book Award for his book "The Fall of America." In 1993, the French Minister of Culture awarded him with the medal of Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres (the Order of Arts and Letters).
In 1994, when the International Lesbian and Gay Association successfully banished all connections to the North American Man Boy Love Association in order to gain consultative status in the United Nations, Ginsberg opposed (together with modern gay rights founder Harry Hay). He said that he supported NAMBLA's right to free speech because the hysteria over pederasty reminded him of the hysteria over homosexuality itself while he was growing up. While his poetry praised the love of youths, his interests lay mostly in young men above the age of consent.
Quotations
"Our goal was to save the planet and alter human consciousness. That will take a long time, if it happens at all."
"Poetry is not an expression of the party line. It's that time of night, lying in bed, thinking what you really think, making the private world public, that's what the poet does."
"Pot is fun."
"The only thing that can save the world is the reclaiming of the awareness of the world. That's what poetry does."
"Master thyself and others will follow."
"First thought, best thought." (referring to his, and other Beat writers' unique style of writing poetry)
"The CIA and the Mafia are in cahoots"
Bibliography
''Howl and Other Poems'' (1956)
''Kaddish and Other Poems'' (1961)
''Reality Sandwiches'' (1963)
''The Yage Letters'' (1963) with William S. Burroughs
''Planet News'' (1968)
''The Gates of Wrath: Rhymed Poems 19481951'' (1972)
''The Fall of America: Poems of These States'' (1973)
''Iron Horse'' (1972)
''Mind Breaths'' (1978)
''Plutonian Ode: Poems 19771980'' (1982)
''Collected Poems: 19471980'' (1984)
''White Shroud Poems: 19801985'' (1986)
''Cosmopolitan Greetings Poems: 19861993'' (1994)
''Howl Annotated'' (1995)
''Illuminated Poems'' (1996)
''Selected Poems: 19471995'' (1996)
''Death and Fame: Poems 19931997'' (1999)
'''Further Reading'''
Miles, Barry. ''Ginsberg: A Biography.'' London: Virgin Publishing Ltd. (2001), paperback, 628 pages, ISBN 0753504863
Schumacher, Michael (edt.). ''Family Business: Selected Letters Between a Father and Son.'' Bloomsbury (2002), paperback, 448 pages, ISBN 1582342164
Schumacher, Michael. ''Dharma Lion: A Biography of Allen Ginsberg.'' New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994.
Bullough, Vern L. "Before Stonewall: Activists for Gay and Lesbian Rights in Historical Context." Harrington Park Press, 2002. pp 304 311.
Notes
! Instructions for adding a footnote:
NOTE: Footnotes in this article use names, not numbers. Please see Wikipedia:Footnote3 for details.
1) Assign your footnote a unique name, for example TheSun Dec9.
2) Add the macro to the body of the article, where you want the new footnote.
3) Take note of the name of the footnote that immediately proceeds yours in the article body.
4) Add to the list, immediately below the footnote you noted in step3.
5) Multiple footnotes to the same reference will not work: you must insert two uniquely named footnotes.
NOTE: It is important to add the Footnote in the right order in the list.
div style "font size: 90 "
Modern American Poetry website. Accessed 10 20 05.
by Bonesy Jones on the Biography Project. Accessed 10 20 05.
Ibid.
Modern American Poetry website. Accessed 10 20 05.
Ibid.
! READ ME!! PLEASE DO NOT JUST ADD NEW NOTES AT THE BOTTOM. See the instructions above on ordering.
div
External links
With audio clips, poems, and related essays, from the Academy of American Poets
by Ralph Lichtensteiger
(the first half of which was written on marijuana)
Streaming audio and 64 kbit s MP3 ZIP
Streaming audio and 64 kbit s MP3 ZIP
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Allen Ginsberg
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
Ginsberg, Allen
bg:
cs:Allen Ginsberg
de:Allen Ginsberg
el:
es:Allen Ginsberg
eo:Allen GINSBERG
fr:Allen Ginsberg
it:Allen Ginsberg
he:
nl:Allen Ginsberg
ja:
pl:Allen Ginsberg
fi:Allen Ginsberg
sv:Allen Ginsberg
In mathematics, a field mathF math is said to be '''algebraically closed''' if every polynomial in one variable of degree at least math1 math, with coefficients in mathF math, has a zero (root) in mathF math.
As an example, the field of real numbers is not algebraically closed, because the polynomial equation
:math3x 2 1 0 math
has no solution in real numbers, even though both of its coefficients (math3 math and math1 math) are real. The same argument proves that the field of rational numbers is not algebraically closed. Also, no finite field mathF math is algebraically closed, because if matha 1 math, matha 2 math, , matha n math are the elements of mathF math, then the polynomial
:math(x a 1)(x a 2) mathmath(x a n) 1 math
has no zero in mathF math. By contrast, the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed: this is stated by the fundamental theorem of algebra. Another example of an algebraically closed field is the field of algebraic numbers.
Given a field mathF math, the assertion mathF math is algebraically closed is equivalent to each one of the following:
Every polynomial mathp(x) math of degree mathn mathmath1 math, with coefficients in mathF math, splits into linear factors. In other words, there are elements mathk math,mathx 1 math,mathx 2 math,,mathx n math in mathF math such that
::mathp(x) k(x x 1)(x x 2) mathmath(x x n) math.
The field mathF math has no proper algebraic extension.
For each natural number mathn math, every linear map from mathF n math into itself has some eigenvector.
Every rational function in one variable mathx math, with coefficients in mathF math, can be written as the sum of a polynomial function with rational functions of the form matha (x b) n math, where mathn math is a natural number, and matha math and mathb math are elements of mathF math.
If mathF math is an algebraically closed field, matha math is an element of mathF math, and mathn math is a natural number, then matha math has an mathn mathsupth sup root in mathF math, since this is the same thing as saying that the equation mathx n a 0 math has some root in mathF math. However, there are fields in which every element has an mathn mathsupth sup root (for each natural number mathn math) but which are not algebraically closed. In fact, even assuming that every polynomial of the form mathx n a math splits into linear factors is not enough to assure that the field is algebraically closed.
Every field mathF math has an "algebraic closure", which is the smallest algebraically closed field of which mathF math is a subfield.
References
S. Lang, ''Algebra'', Springer Verlag, 2004, ISBN 0 387 95385 X
B. L. van der Waerden, ''Algebra I'', Springer Verlag, 1991, ISBN 0 387 97424 5
Category:Abstract algebra
de:Algebraisch abgeschlossen
es:Cuerpo algebraicamente cerrado
fr:Corps alg briquement clos
it:Campo algebricamente chiuso
pt:Corpo algebricamente fechado
ru:
style "float:right "
'''August 6''' is the 218th day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar (219th in leap years), with 147 days remaining.
Events
1538 Bogota, Colombia founded by Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada.
1806 Francis II, the last Holy Roman Emperor, abdicates, thus ending the Holy Roman Empire.
1819 Norwich University founded in Vermont as the first private military school in the United States.
1825 Bolivia gains independence from Spain.
1861 British annexation of Lagos, Nigeria.
1862 American Civil War: The Confederate ironclad CSS ''Arkansas'' is scuttled on the Mississippi River after suffering damage in a battle with USS ''Essex'' near Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
1890 At Auburn Prison in New York, the first execution by electric chair is performed, with murderer William Kemmler as the subject.
1901 Kiowa land in Oklahoma is opened for white settlement, effectively dissolving the contiguous reservation.
1914 Ten German U boats leave their base in Heligoland to attack Royal Navy warships in the North Sea, beginning the First Battle of the Atlantic.
1915 World War I: The Battle of Sari Bair begins The Allies mount a diversionary attack timed to coincide with a major Allied landing of reinforcements at Suvla Bay.
1926 Gertrude Ederle becomes first woman to swim across the English Channel.
1926 In New York, the Warner Brothers' Vitaphone system premieres with the movie ''Don Juan'' starring John Barrymore.
1945 World War II: the Atomic bombing of Hiroshima. An atomic bomb codenamed ''Little Boy'' is dropped by the American B 29 Enola Gay on the city of Hiroshima in Japan at 8:16 a.m., killing 80,000 outright with another 60,000 dead by the end of the year due to fallout sickness. Ultimately, about 200,000 die due to the atomic bomb.
1960 Cuban Revolution: In response to a United States embargo, Cuba nationalizes American and foreign owned property in the nation.
1962 Jamaica becomes independent.
1965 US President Lyndon B. Johnson signs the Voting Rights Act of 1965 into United States law.
1984 Pop star Prince releases ''Purple Rain'', the album which would launch him to superstardom.
1986 A low pressure system that redeveloped off the New South Wales coast dumps a record 328 millimetres (13 inches) of rain in a day on Sydney.
1988 "Police riot" in New York City's Tompkins Square Park
1990 Gulf War: The United Nations Security Council orders a global trade embargo against Iraq in response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
1991 Tim Berners Lee releases files describing his idea for the World Wide Web.
1991 Doi Takako, chair of the Social Democratic Party (Japan), becomes Japan's first female speaker of the House of Representatives.
1993 Louis Freeh is confirmed by the United States Senate to be the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
1993 ''The Fugitive'' opens in theaters, starring Harrison Ford and Tommy Lee Jones.
1996 NASA announces that the ALH 84001 meteorite, thought to originate from Mars, contains evidence of primitive life forms.
1997 Microsoft buys 150 million worth of shares of financially troubled Apple Computer.
1997 Korean Air Flight 801, a Boeing 747 300, crashes into the jungle on Guam on approach to airport, killing 228.
2000 The Roman Catholic Church's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, under Prefect Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, publishes ''Dominus Iesus'', notable for its lack of the filioque clause in the Latin text of the Nicene Creed.
2001 White House briefing entitled Bin Laden Determined to Strike in U.S. delivered to George W. Bush. This document foreshadowed the September 11, 2001 attacks.
2002 Marquis de la Fayette is made Honorary Citizen of the United States
2002 Manindra Agrawal et al prove the long standing number theory conjecture in the article entitled "Primes in P".
Births
1180 Emperor Go Toba of Japan (d. 1239)
1504 Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury (d. 1575)
1619 Barbara Strozzi, Italian singer and composer (d. 1677)
1638 Nicolas Malebranche, French philosopher (d. 1715)
1644 Louise de la Valli re, French mistress of Louis XIV of France (d. 1710)
1656 Claude de Forbin, French naval commander (d. 1733)
1697 Charles VII, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1745)
1715 Luc de Clapiers, marquis de Vauvenargues, French writer (d. 1747)
1766 William Hyde Wollaston, English chemist (d. 1828)
1768 Jean Baptiste Bessi res, French marshal (d. 1813)
1809 Alfred Lord Tennyson, English poet (d. 1892)
1844 James Henry Greathead, British engineer (d. 1896)
1844 Alfred, Duke of Saxe Coburg and Gotha (d. 1900)
1868 Paul Claudel, French poet (d. 1955)
1874 Charles Fort, American writer and researcher (d. 1932)
1877 Wallace H. White, Jr., U.S. Senator from Maine (d. 1952)
1880 Hans Moser (actor), Austrian actor (d. 1964)
1881 Leo Carrillo, American actor (d. 1961)
1881 Alexander Fleming, Scottish scientist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (d. 1955)
1881 Louella Parsons, American gossip columnist (d. 1972)
1889 John Middleton Murry, English poet (d. 1957)
1892 Hoot Gibson, American actor (d. 1962)
1893 Wright Patman, American politician (d. 1976)
1900 Cecil H. Green, American geophysicist and businessman (d.2003)
1902 Dutch Schultz, American bootlegger and gangster (d. 1935)
1911 Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (d. 1989)
1916 Richard Hofstadter, American historian (d. 1970)
1917 Robert Mitchum, American actor (d. 1997)
1922 Sir Freddie Laker, English entrepreneur
1923 Jess Collins, American artist (d. 2004)
1928 Andy Warhol, American artist (d. 1987)
1932 Howard Hodgkin, British painter and print maker
1934 Piers Anthony, English writer
1937 Barbara Windsor, English actress
1938 Paul Bartel, American actor, writer, and director (d. 2000)
1941 Lyle Berman, American poker player
1943 Jon Postel, Computer Scientist
1946 Roh Moo hyun, President of South Korea
1946 Masaaki Sakai, Japanese comedian
1949 Alan Campbell, Northern Irish clergyman
1949 Clarence Richard Silva, Catholic Bishop of Honolulu
1951 Daryl Somers, Australian television personality
1957 Jim McGreevey, Governor of New Jersey
1962 Michelle Yeoh, Hong Kong actress
1963 Kevin Mitnick, computer hacker
1965 Yuki Kajiura, Japanese composer
1969 Elliott Smith, American musician (d. 2003)
1970 M. Night Shyamalan, Indian born film director, writer, producer, and actor
1971 Merrin Dungey, American actress
1972 Geri Halliwell, British singer
1973 Asia Carrera, American actress
1976 Melissa George, Australian actress
1978 Billy Klippert, Canadian singer
1979 Steven McCrory, IP Solutions Specialist
1982 Adrianne Curry, American reality television
1983 Robin van Persie, Dutch football player
1990 JonBen t Ramsey, American beauty queen and murder victim (d. 1996)
! Do not add yourself, or anyone else that does not already have a Wikipedia article, to this list.
Deaths
258 Saint Pope Sixtus II
523 Saint Pope Hormisdas
1162 Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona
1195 Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria (b. 1129)
1221 Saint Dominic, Spanish founder of the Dominicans (b. 1170)
1272 King Stephen V of Hungary
1414 King Ladislas of Naples (b. 1377)
1458 Pope Callixtus III (b. 1378)
1623 Anne Hathaway (Shakespeare's wife) (b. 1556)
1628 Johannes Junius, Mayor of Bamberg (b. 1573)
1637 Ben Jonson, English writer (b. 1572)
1645 Lionel Cranfield, 1st Earl of Middlesex, English merchant (b. 1575)
1660 Diego Vel zquez, Spanish painter (b. 1599)
1679 John Snell, English royalist (b. 1629)
1695 Fran ois de Harlay de Champvallon, French Catholic archbishop (b. 1625)
1753 Georg Wilhelm Richmann, Russian physicist (struck by lightning) (b. 1711)
1759 Eugene Aram, English philologist (b. 1704)
1794 Henry Bathurst, 2nd Earl Bathurst, British politician (b. 1714)
1850 Edward Walsh, Irish poet (b. 1805)
1866 John Mason Neale, English divine, scholar and hymnwriter (b. 1818)
1904 Eduard Hanslick, Austrian music critic (b. 1825)
1914 Ellen Louise Wilson, First Lady of the United States, first wife of President Woodrow Wilson (b. 1860)
1931 Bix Beiderbecke, American musician (b. 1903)
1942 Jonathan Campbell, American film pioneer (b. 1875)
1945 Prince Wu of Korea (b. 1912)
1946 Tony Lazzeri, baseball player (b. 1903)
1959 Preston Sturges, American playwright, screenwriter, and director (b. 1898)
1964 Sir Cedric Hardwicke, English actor (b. 1893)
1966 Cordwainer Smith, American writer (b. 1913)
1969 Theodor Adorno, German sociologist and philosopher (b. 1903)
1973 Fulgencio Batista, Cuban dictator (b. 1901)
1974 Gene Ammons, American jazz saxophonist (b. 1925)
1976 Gregor Piatigorsky, Russian cellist (b. 1903)
1978 Pope Paul VI (b. 1897)
1979 Feodor Felix Konrad Lynen, German biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1911)
1983 Klaus Nomi, German singer (b. 1944)
1985 Forbes Burnham, President of Guyana (b. 1923)
1987 Quinn Martin, American television producer (b. 1922)
1991 Harry Reasoner, American reporter (b. 1923)
1993 Tex Hughson, baseball player (b. 1916)
1994 Domenico Modugno, Italian singer and songwriter (b. 1928)
1998 Andre Weil, French mathematician (b. 1906)
2001 Jorge Amado de Faria, Brazilian writer (b. 1912)
2002 Edsger Dijkstra, Dutch computer scientist (b. 1930)
2004 Rick James, American musician (b. 1948)
2005 Keter Betts, American jazz bassist (b. 1928)
2005 Robin Cook, British politician (b. 1946)
2005 Ibrahim Ferrer, Cuban musician (Buena Vista Social Club) (b. 1927)
Holidays and observances
Christianity Feast of the Transfiguration of Christ
Bolivia Independence Day
Jamaica Independence Day
United Arab Emirates H.H. Sheikh Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahyan's Accession Day
Japan Toro Nagashi (Hiroshima) Floating lantern ceremony to honor those killed by the U.S. atomic bomb in Hiroshima.
External links
August 5 August 7 July 6 September 6 listing of all days
af:6 Augustus
ar:6
an:6 d'agosto
ast:6 d'agostu
bg:6
be:6
bs:6. avgust
ca:6 d'agost
ceb:Agosto 6
cv: , 6
co:6 d'aostu
cs:6. srpen
cy:6 Awst
da:6. august
de:6. August
et:6. august
el:6
es:6 de agosto
eo:6 a de a gusto
eu:Abuztuaren 6
fo:6. august
fr:6 ao t
fy:6 augustus
ga:6 L nasa
gl:6 de agosto
ko:8 6
hr:6. kolovoza
io:6 di agosto
ilo:Agosto 6
id:6 Agustus
ia:6 de augusto
ie:6 august
is:6. g st
it:6 agosto
he:6
jv:6 Agustus
ka:6
csb:6 z lnika
ku:6' gelaw j
lt:Rugpj io 6
lb:6. August
li:6 augustus
hu:Augusztus 6
mk:6
ms:6 Ogos
nap:6 'e a sto
nl:6 augustus
ja:8 6
no:6. august
nn:6. august
oc:6 d'agost
pl:6 sierpnia
pt:6 de Agosto
ro:6 august
ru:6
sco:6 August
sq:6 Gusht
scn:6 di austu
simple:August 6
sk:6. august
sl:6. avgust
sr:6.
fi:6. elokuuta
sv:6 augusti
tl:Agosto 6
tt:6. August
te: 6
th:6
vi:6 th ng 8
tr:6 A ustos
uk:6
wa:6 d' awousse
war:Agosto 6
zh:8 6
pam:Agostu 6
'''Anatoli Yevgenyevich Karpov''' ( ) (born May 23, 1951) is a Russian chess grandmaster and former World Champion. He is the most successful tournament player of all time, and as of July 2005 he has 161 first place finishes to his credit. From 1978 to 1998 he played in every FIDE World Championship match. His overall professional record is 1,118 wins, 287 losses, and 1,480 draws in 3,163 games. His peak ELO rating is 2780.
Grandmaster
Karpov was born on May 23, 1951 in Zlatoust in the former Soviet Union and learned to play chess at the age of 4. At age 12 he was accepted into Mikhail Botvinnik's prestigious chess school. Ironically, Botvinnik had this to say about a young Karpov: "The boy doesn't have a clue about chess, and there's no future at all for him in this profession." Karpov proved him wrong by becoming the youngest Soviet National Master in history at 15, and won in his first international chess tournament several months later. In 1967 he took 5th in the Soviet Junior Chess Championship and won the European Junior Chess Championship later that same year. In 1969 he became the first Soviet player since Boris Spassky (1955) to win the World Junior Chess Championship with a score of 10 out of 11. Soon afterwards he tied for 4th place at an international tournament in Caracas, Venezuela and became the world's youngest Grandmaster.
Candidate
The 1970s showed a major improvement in his game. His ELO rating shot up from 2540 in 1971 to 2660 in 1973, when he came in 2nd in the USSR Chess Championship and placed first in the Leningrad Interzonal Tournament. The latter qualified him for the 1974 Candidates cycle, which determined who was allowed to challenge the reigning World Champion, Bobby Fischer.
Karpov beat Lev Polugaevsky by 3 5 in the first Candidates match to face former World Champion Boris Spassky in the next round. Karpov was on record saying that he believed Spassky would easily beat him and win the Candidates cycle to face Fischer, and that he (Karpov) would win the following Candidates cycle in 1977.
Most expected the Spassky Karpov match to be a one sided rout by the ex champ Spassky. Although Spassky won the first game as black in good style, tenacious and aggressive play from Karpov secured him a win 4 1 6. Karpov was certainly not hurt by the fact that Spassky's chief opening analyst, 1955 Soviet Champion Efim Geller, defected to Karpov's side several months before the match.
The Candidates final was against fellow Russian Viktor Korchnoi, a notable fighting player. Intense games were fought, including one "opening laboratory" win against the Sicilian Dragon. Karpov went 30 up but tired towards the end and allowed Korchnoi two wins, but Karpov prevailed 3 2 19. Thus he won the right to challenge Fischer for the World Championship.
Though the world championship match between the young Soviet prodigy and the incomparably dominant American Fischer was highly anticipated, the match never came about. Fischer drew up a list of ten demands, chief among them the provisions that draws wouldn't count, the first to ten victories wins, and if the score was tied 99 the champion would retain the crown. This means that candidate needed two wins more than the reigning champion because narrowest possible win for him is 108. The International Chess Federation (FIDE) flatly refused at first, but eventually conceded the first two. However, Fischer demanded all or nothing, and when FIDE refused to give into the third demand, Fischer resigned his crown, to the huge disappointment of the chess world. Karpov later attempted to set up another match with Fischer, but all the negotiations fell through. Fischer never did play Karpov (or Kasparov, for that matter) and scorned them as inferior players. This thrust the young Karpov into the role of World Champion without defeating the reigning champion, which lead some chess pundits to accuse Karpov of being a "paper world champion"that he had earned the title in a ceremony, but not over a chessboard.
When Kasparov was in a bitter struggle for the world championship with Karpov, he often reminded others that Karpov won the title by default. But while preparing a monumental book series ''Kasparov: On My Great Predecessors'', Kasparov argued that Karpov would have had the better chances, because he had beaten Spassky convincingly and was a new breed of tough professional, and indeed had higher quality games, while Fischer had been inactive for three years. Critics argue that Kasparov was trying to boost his own prestige by boosting that of the man he defeated. Spassky thought that Fischer would have won in 1975 but Karpov would have qualified again and beaten Fischer in 1978. Zsuzsa Polgar thinks Fischer would have won very narrowly in 1975 due to his greater experience.
World champion
Shamed that he had become the twelfth world champion in this manner, and desperately trying to prove he was worthy of the crown, Karpov participated in nearly every major tournament for the next ten years. He created the most phenomenal streak of tournament wins against the strongest players in the world the chess world had ever seen. This tournament success even eclipsed the pre war tournament record of Alexander Alekhine. He held the record for most consecutive tournament victories (9) until it was shattered by Garry Kasparov (14).
In 1978, Karpov's first title defence was against Viktor Korchnoi, the opponent he defeated in the previous Candidates tournament. The situation was vastly different from the previous match, because in the intervening years Korchnoi had defected from the Soviet Union. The match was played in Baguio in the Philippines, and a vast array of psychological tricks were used during the match, from Karpov's Dr. Zukhar who attempted to hypnotize Korchnoi during the game, to Korchnoi's mirror glasses to ward off the hypnotic stare, Korchnoi's offering to play under the Jolly Roger flag when he was denied the right to play under Switzerland's, to Karpov's yogurt supposedly being used to send him secret messages, to Korchnoi inviting two local cult members (on trial for attempted murder) into the hall as members of his team.
The off board antics are better remembered than the actual chess match. Karpov took an early lead, but Korchnoi staged an amazing comeback very late in the match, and came very close to winning. Karpov narrowly won the last game to take the match 65, with 21 draws.
Three years later Korchnoi re emerged as the Candidates winner against German finalist Dr. Robert Huebner to challenge Karpov in Merano, Italy. This time the psychological trick was the arrest of Korchnoi's son for evading conscription. Again the politics off the board overshadowed the games, but this time Karpov easily won (117, 6 2 10) in what is remembered to be the "Massacre of Merano".
Karpov's tournament career also reached a peak at the exceptional Montreal "Super Grandmaster" tournament in 1979, where he ended joint first with Mikhail Tal ahead of a field of superb grandmasters like Jan Timman, Ljubomir Ljubojevic, Boris Spassky, and Lubomir Kavalek. Meanwhile, he had also won the prestigious Linares tournament in 1981 (and again in 1994), the Tilburg tournament in 1977, 1979, 1980, 1982, and 1983, and the Soviet Championship in 1976 and 1983 (and again in 1988).
To illustrate Karpov's dominance over his peers as champion, his score was 11 2 20 v Spassky, 5 12 v Robert H bner, 6 1 16 v Ulf Andersson, 3 1 10 v Vasily Smyslov, 1 16 v Mikhail Tal, 10 2 13 v Ljubojevic.
! Unsourced image removed: was between Garry Kasparov (left) and Anatoly Karpov (right).
Karpov had cemented his position as the world's best player and world champion when Garry Kasparov arrived on the scene. In their first World Championship match in 1984, Karpov quickly built a 40 lead, and needed only two more wins to keep his title. Instead, the next 17 games were drawn, and it took Karpov until Game 27 to finally win another game. In Game 31, Karpov had a winning position but failed to take advantage and settled for a draw. He lost the next game, but drew the next 14. In particular, Karpov held a solidly winning position in Game 41, but again blundered terribly and had to settle for a draw. After Kasparov suddenly won Game 47 and 48, Karpov suffered a physical collapse, having lost 10 kg (22 lb) over the course of the match. The FIDE President controversially terminated the match, which had lasted an unprecedented four months with five wins for Karpov, three for Kasparov, and a staggering forty draws. A rematch was set for the following year. In a hard fight, Karpov lost his title 11 to 13 in the 1985 match, ending his ten year reign as champion.
Rival
Karpov remained a formidable opponent for most of the eighties. He fought Kasparov in three more World Championship matches in 1986 (held in London and Leningrad), 1987 (held in Seville), and 1990 (held in Lyon and New York City). All three matches were extremely close (the scores were 12.5 to 11.5, 12 to 12, and 12.5 to 11.5). In all three matches Karpov had winning chances up to the very last games. In particular, the 1987 Seville match featured an astonishing blunder by Kasparov in the 23rd game, and should have led to Karpov's winning the title. Instead, in the final game, needing only a draw to win the title, Karpov blundered on his 33rd and 64th moves and lost, ending the match in a draw and allowing Kasparov to keep the title.
The overall game score between them stayed virtually even until the late 1990s, when the score shifted decisively towards Kasparov. Currently, in their 235 formal games played, Karpov has 23 wins, 33 losses, and an incredible 179 draws. In their five world championship matches, Karpov has 19 wins, 21 losses, and 104 draws in 144 games.
Although twelve years older than Kasparov, Karpov still has the stamina and endurance to be a match for Kasparov. In 2002, he defeated Kasparov in a rapid time control match 2.5 1.5. Karpov is on record saying that had he had the opportunity to fight Fischer for the crown like Kasparov had the opportunity to fight him, he (Karpov) could have been a much better player as a result. Though the struggle for the world championship made them enemies, Karpov and Kasparov maintain a tremendous level of respect for each other. The two of them and their titanic struggles make up a chess rivalry that even surpassed that of Capablanca and Alekhine.
FIDE Champion again
It came as a surprise, then, that Karpov lost a Candidates Match against Nigel Short in 1992. But in 1993, Karpov reacquired the FIDE World Champion title when Kasparov and Short split from FIDE. Karpov crushed Jan Timmanthe loser of the Candidates final against Short. Once again he had become World Champion, and once again he did so controversially. He defended his title against Gata Kamsky ( 6 3 9) in 1996. However, in 1998, FIDE largely scrapped the old system of Candidate Matches, instead having a large knock out event in which a large number of players contested short matches against each other over just a few weeks. In the first of these events, champion Karpov was seeded straight into the final, defeating Viswanathan Anand ( 4 2 2). But subsequently the champion had to qualify like other players. Karpov resigned his title in anger at the new rules in 1999, so the winner of the 1999 tournament (Alexander Khalifman) became FIDE World Champion.
However, the FIDE champions were not recognized as such by the general public. The fact that the FIDE champions were regularly crushed by Kasparov in tournaments testified to his dominance. The FIDE matches received little public attention, while Kasparov's matches with the PCA and subsequently Braingames were widely reported in the media. For more details about these series of champions, see the World Chess Championship article.
Towards Retirement?
In 1991 Karpov temporarily dropped to third in the FIDE ranking list, the first time since 1971. Though he quickly recovered, many said that Karpov had lost his edge, and that his playing level had declined. However, Karpov bounced back against the world's very strongest players (in the order of their finish, Kasparov, Shirov, Bareev, Kramnik, Lautier, Anand, Kamsky, Topalov, Ivanchuk, Gelfand, Illescas, Judit Polgar, and Beliavsky) in the landmark "super strong" tournament Linares 1994 (average ELO rating 2685, the highest in history, meaning it was the first Category XVIII tournament ever held).
Impressed by the strength of the tournament, Kasparov had said several days before the tournament that the winner could rightfully be called the world champion of tournaments. Perhaps spurred on by this comment, Karpov played the chess of his life and dramatically won the tournament. He was undefeated and earned 11 points out of 13 possible (the best world class tournament winning percentage in 64 years), dominating second place Kasparov and Shirov by a huge 2.5 points. Many of his wins were spectacular (in particular, his win over Topalov, detailed below, is considered possibly his finest throughout his career). This performance against the best players in the world put his ELO rating tournament performance at 2985, the highest performance rating of any chess player in any tournament in all of chess history.
Even recently, few players have surpassed Karpov's achievements. Since he dropped out of the top three players in the world on the FIDE rankings, only Garry Kasparov, Viswanathan Anand, Vladimir Kramnik, and (as of January 2005) Veselin Topalov have been in the top three slots. In other words, Karpov is the last person to have been in the top three in the world before Kasparov, Anand, Kramnik, and Topalov. In addition, Karpov is the only player among these to ever have ranked number one in the world ahead of Kasparov.
However, Karpov's outstanding classical tournament play has been seriously limited since 1995, since he prefers to be more involved in politics of his home country of Russia. He had been a member of the Supreme Soviet Commission for Foreign Affairs and the President of the Soviet Peace Fund before the Soviet Union broke up. In addition, he had been involved in several disputes with FIDE and became increasingly disillusioned with chess. In the October 2005 FIDE rating list, he is 33rd in the world with an ELO rating of 2672.
However, more recently, because of his traditional strength at managing his thinking time, Karpov has instead begun revamping his style to specialize in rapid chess.
Sample game
Chess diagram
tright
8 rd qd rd kd
7 ql bd pd
6 pd nd pd pd
5 pd pd
4 pl pl
3 nl pl
2 pl pl pl bl
1 rl rl kl
a b c d e f g h
In this position, Karpov (white), already with a slight advantage, initiates the first of three rook offers
This game, Anatoly Karpov v Veselin Topalov, Linares 1994, given in algebraic notation, played during one of his best tournaments, features Karpov offering a rook for capture three times, and eventually sacrificing two rooks for a scintillating victory.
1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. Nf3 cxd4 4. Nxd4 e6 5. g3 Nc6 6. Bg2 Bc5 7. Nb3 Be7 8. Nc3 O O 9. O O d6 10. Bf4 Nh5 11. e3 Nxf4 12. exf4 Bd7 13. Qd2 Qb8 14. Rfe1! g6 15. h4 a6 16. h5 b5 17. hxg6 hxg6 18. Nc5 dxc5 19. Qxd7 Rc8
(see diagram)
'''20. Rxe6!!''' Ra7 20...fxe6 21.Bxc6 Ra7 22.Qxe6 Kg7 23.Be4 and White is clearly better '''21. Rxg6 !''' fxg6 22. Qe6 Kg7 23. Bxc6 Rd8 24. cxb5 Bf6 25. Ne4 Bd4 26. bxa6 Qb6 27. Rd1 Qxa6 '''28. Rxd4!!''' Rxd4 28...cxd4 29.Qf6 Kh6 30.Qh4 Kg7 31.Qxd8 Qxc6 32.Qxd4 and White is better 29. Qf6 Kg8 30. Qxg6 Kf8 31. Qe8 Kg7 32. Qe5 Kg8 33. Nf6 Kf7 34. Be8 Kf8 35. Qxc5 Qd6 36. Qxa7 Qxf6 37. Bh5 Rd2 38. b3 Rb2 39. Kg2 1 0
Further reading
''World chess champions'' by Edward G. Winter, editor. 1981 ISBN 0080249041
''The World's Great Chess Games'' by Reuben Fine, Dover 1983. ISBN 0486245128
''Anatoly Karpov's Best Games'' by Anatoly Karpov, Batsford 2003. ISBN 0713478438
''Karpov on Karpov: A Memoirs of a Chess World Champion'' by Anatoly Karpov, Simon 1992. ISBN 0689120605
''Curse of Kirsan: Adventures in the Chess Underworld'' by Sarah Hurst, Russell Enterprises, 2002.
succession box
before Bobby Fischer
title World Chess Champion
years 19751985
after Garry Kasparov
succession box
before Garry Kasparov
title FIDE World Chess Champion
years 19931999
after Alexander Khalifman
External links
in Russian.
Video Clip
His "best" games:
Karpov, Anatoly
Karpov, Anatoly
Karpov, Anatoly
Karpov, Anatoly
Karpov, Anatoly
cs:Anatolij Karpov
de:Anatoli Jewgenjewitsch Karpow
et:Anatoli Karpov
el:
es:Anatoli Karpov
fa:
fr:Anatoli Karpov
it:Anatoly Karpov
he:
nl:Anatoli Karpov
ja:
no:Anatolij Karpov
nn:Anatolij Karpov
pl:Anatolij Karpow
pt:Anatoly Karpov
ru: ,
fi:Anatoli Karpov
sv:Anatolij Karpov
tr:Anatoli Karpov
The '''aspect ratio''' of a two dimensional shape is the ratio of its longest dimension to its shortest dimension.
The term is most commonly used with reference to:
images (see aspect ratio (image))
paper (see paper size)
the wing plans of aircraft or birds (see aspect ratio (wing)).
''See also'': Golden ratio, Ratio
ja:
zh:
'''Auto racing''' (also known as '''automobile racing''', '''autosport''' or '''motorsport''') is a sport involving racing automobiles. '''Motor racing''' or '''motorsport''' may also mean motorcycle racing, and can include motorboat racing and air racing. It is one of the world's most popular spectator sports and perhaps the most thoroughly commercialized.
History
The Start
Auto racing began almost immediately after the construction of the first successful petrol fuelled autos. In 1894, the first contest was organized by Paris magazine ''Le Petit Journal'', a reliability test to determine best performance.
A year later the first real race was staged, from Paris, France to Bordeaux, France. First over the line was mile Levassor but he was disqualified because his car was not a required four seater.
An international competition began with the Gordon Bennett Cup in auto racing.
The first auto race in the United States, over a 54.36 mile (87.48 km) course, took place in Chicago, Illinois on November 2, 1895, Frank Duryea winning in 10 h and 23 min, beating three petrol fuelled cars and two electric. The first trophy awarded was the Vanderbilt Cup.
City to city racing
With auto construction and racing dominated by France, the French automobile club ACF staged a number of major international races, usually from or to Paris, connecting with another major city in Europe or France.
These very successful races ended in 1903 when Marcel Renault was involved in a fatal accident near Angouleme in the Paris Madrid race. Eight fatalities caused the French government to stop the race in Bordeaux and ban open road racing.
! (much more on this)
1910 1950
The 1930s saw the radical differentiation of racing vehicles from high priced road cars, with Delage, Auto Union, Mercedes Benz, Delahaye and Bugatti constructing streamlined vehicles with engines producing up to 450 kW(612HP) with the aid of multiple superchargers. From 1928 1930 and again in 1934 1936, the maximum weight permitted was 750 kg(1654Lbs), a rule diametrically opposed to current racing regulations. Extensive use of aluminium alloys was required to achieve light weight, and in the case of the Mercedes, the paint was removed to satisfy the weight limitation, producing the famous Silver Arrows.
:''See: Grand Prix motor racing''
Categories
There are many categories of auto racing.
Single seater racing
:''Main article: Open wheel racing''
Single seater (open wheel) racing is perhaps the most well known form of motorsport, with cars designed specifically for high speed racing. The wheels are not covered, and the cars often have aerofoil wings front and rear to produce downforce and enhance adhesion to the track.
Single seater races are held on specially designed closed circuits or street circuits closed for the event. Many single seater races in North America are held on "oval" circuits and the Indy Racing League races mostly on ovals.
The best known variety of single seater racing is the Formula One World Championship, which involves an annual championship featuring major international car and engine manufacturers in an ongoing battle of technology and driver skill. Formula One is, by any measure, the most expensive sport in the world, with some teams spending in excess of 201 million US dollars per year. Formula One is widely considered to be the pinnacle of motorsports, and a seat in a Formula One car is undoubtedly the peak of any driver's racing career. In North America, the cars used in the National Championship (currently Champcars and the Indy Racing League) have traditionally been similar to F1 cars but with more restrictions on technology aimed at helping to control costs.
Other single seater racing series are GP2 (formerly known as Formula 3000 and Formula Two), Formula Nippon, Formula Nissan (also known as the Telefonica World Series), Formula Three, Formula Atlantic, and A1 Grand Prix.
There are other categories of single seater racing, including kart racing, which employs a small, low cost machine on small tracks. Many of today's top drivers started their careers in karts.
Rallying
:''Main article: Rallying''
Rallying, or rally racing, involves highly modified production cars on (closed) public roads or off road areas run on a point to point format where participants and their co drivers rally to a set of points, leaving in regular intervals from start points. A rally is typically conducted over a number of stages of any terrain, which entrants are often allowed to scout beforehand. The co driver uses the "pacenotes" to help the driver complete each stage as fast as possible, reading the detailed shorthand aloud over an in car intercom system. Competition is based on lowest total elasped time over the course of an event.
The top series is the World Rally Championship (WRC), but there also regional championships and many countries have their own national championships. Some famous rallies include the Monte Carlo Rally and Rally Argentina. Another famous event (actually best described as a "rally raid") is the Paris Dakar Rally. There are also many smaller, club level, categories of rallies which are popular with amateurs, making up the "grass roots" of motorsports.
Ice Racing
:''Main article: Ice Racing''
Touring car racing
:''Main article: Touring car racing''
Touring car racing is a style of road racing that is run with production derived race cars. It often features exciting, full contact racing due to the small speed differentials and large grids.
The V8 Supercars originally from Australia, Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters originally from Germany, and the World Touring Car Championship held with 2 non European races (previously the European Touring Car Championship) are the major touring car championships conducted worldwide.
The Sports Car Club of America's SPEED World Challenge Touring Car and GT championships are dominant in North America while the venerable British Touring Car Championship continues in Great Britain. America's historic Trans Am Series is undergoing a period of transition, but is still the longest running road racing series in the U.S. The National Auto Sport Association also provides a venue for amateurs to compete in home built factory derived vehicles on various local circuits.
Stock car racing
in Riverside, California.
:''Main article: Stock car racing''
Stock car racing is the American variant of touring car racing. Usually conducted on ovals, the cars look like production cars but are in fact purpose built racing machines which are all very similar in specifications. Early stock cars were much closer to production vehicles the car to be raced was often driven from track to track.
The main stock car racing series is NASCAR and among the most famous races in the series are the Daytona 500 and Allstate 400 at The Brickyard. NASCAR also runs the Busch Series (a junior stock car league) and the Craftsman Truck Series (pickup trucks).
NASCAR also runs the Featherlite series of "modified" cars which are heavily modified from stock form. With powerful engines, large tires, and light bodies. NASCAR's oldest series is considered by many to be its most exciting.
There are also other stock car series like IROC in the United States and CASCAR in Canada.
British Stock car racing is a form of Short Oval Racing
This takes place on Shale or Tarmac tracks in either Clockwise or Anti Clockwise direction, Depending on the class some of which are contact.
Races are organised by local promoters and all drivers are registered with BRISCA and have their own race number.
What classes exist depends on the promoters, so events in Scotland at Cowdenbeath can be very different from an event at Wimbledon Stadium in London.
''Formula Cars''
F1 Cars built to Specification normally utilising 5,6 or 7 Litre V8 engines
F2 Specification built cars similar to F1 with 2 Litre Ford Pinto Engines
These are the two main National forms of British Stock Car Racing, there are World Championships organised by the governing body
There are also local variants raced in some smaller tracks, they are usually similar to F2 Stock Cars.
F1's race (in the UK) at the following venues:
Belle Vue Stadium (Manchester),
Owlerton Stadium (Sheffield),
Skegness Stadium,
Buxton,
Hednesford,
Birmingham,
Northampton,
Coventry,
Kings Lynn,
Ipswich,
Cowdenbeath,
Knockhill.
They also race in Holland.
''Hot Rods''
Local Variations on the concept of fibreglass cars that look like production models Non Contact
''Production Models''
Modified Road cars, classes range from Non Contact 2 Litre Hot Rods to Contact Banger Racing.
Contact Classes can be identified by the inclusion of external side impact bars and large bumpers at either end made out of square section steel.
Drag racing
:''Main article: Drag racing''
In drag racing, the objective is to complete a certain distance, traditionally 1 4 mile, (400 m), in the shortest possible time. The vehicles range from the everyday car to the purpose built dragster. Speeds and elapsed time differ from class to class. A street car can cover the 1 4 mile (400 m) in 15 s whereas a top fuel dragster can cover the same distance in 4.5 s and reach 330 mph (530 km h). Drag racing was organised as a sport by Wally Parks in the early 1950s through the NHRA (National Hot Rod Association) which is the largest sanctioning motor sports body in the world. The NHRA was formed to prevent people from street racing. Illegal street racing is not drag racing.
Launching its run to 330 mph (530 km h), a top fuel dragster will accelerate at 4.5 ''g'' (44 m ssup2 sup), and when braking and parachutes are deployed, the driver experiences deceleration of 4 ''g'' (39 m ssup2 sup), more than space shuttle occupants. A single top fuel car can be heard over eight miles (13 km) away and can generate a reading of 1.5 to 2 on the Richter scale. (NHRA Mile High Nationals 2001, and 2002 testing from the National Seismology Center.)
Drag racing is often head to head where two cars battle each other, the winner proceeding to the next round. Professional classes are all first to the finish line wins. Sportsman racing is handicapped (slower car getting a head start) using an index, and cars running faster than their index "break out" and lose.
Drag racing is mostly popular in the United States.
Sports car racing
:''Main article: Sports car racing''
In sports car racing, production versions of sports cars and purpose built prototype cars compete with each other on closed circuits. The races are usually conducted over long distances, at least 1000 km, and cars are driven by teams of two or three drivers (and sometimes more in the US), switching every now and then. Due to the performance difference between production based sports cars and sports racing prototypes, one race usually involves many racing classes. In the US the American Le Mans Series was organized in 1999, featuring GT, GTS, and two prototype classes. Another series based on Le Mans began in 2004, the Le Mans Endurance Series, which included four 1000 km races at tracks in Europe. A competing body, Grand Am, which began in 2000, sanctions its own set of endurance series, the Rolex Sports Car Series and the Grand Am Cup. Grand Am events typically feature many more cars and much closer competition than American Le Mans.
Famous sports car races include the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the 24 Hours of Daytona and the 12 Hours of Sebring.
Offroad racing
:''Main article: Offroad racing''
In offroad racing, various classes of specially modified vehicles, including cars, compete in races through off road environments. In North America these races often take place in the desert, such as the famous Baja 1000.
In Europe, "offroad" refers to events such as autocross or rallycross, while desert races and rally raids such as the Paris Dakar, Master Rallye or European "bajas" are called Cross Country Rallies.
Hillclimbing
:''Main article: Hillclimbing''
Kart racing
:''Main article: Kart racing''
Although often seen as the entry point for serious racers into the sport, kart racing, or karting, can be an economic way to try your luck at motorsport and is also a fully fledged international sport in its own right. World famous F1 drivers like Michael and Ralf Schumacher and most of the typical starting grid of a modern Grand Prix took up the sport at around the age of eight, with some testing from age three. Several former motorcycle champions have also taken up the sport, notably Wayne Rainey, who was paralysed in a racing accident and now races a hand controlled kart. As one of the cheapest ways to go racing, karting is seeing its popularity grow worldwide.
Go karts, or just "karts" seem very distant from normal road cars, with dimunitive frames and wheels, but a small engine combined with very light weight make for a quick machine. The tracks are also on a much smaller scale, making kart racing more accessible to the people.
Legend car racing
:''Main article: Legend car racing''
Other categories
Autocrossing
Autograss
Demolition Derby
Dirt speedway racing
Dirt track racing
Drifting
Grand Prix Truck Racing
Road racing
Short track motor racing
Solo
Street racing
Rallycross
Folkrace
Use of flags
''Main article: Racing flags''
In open wheel, stock car and other types of circuit auto races, flags are displayed to indicate the general status of a race and to communicate instructions to competitors in a race. While the flags have changed from the first years (e.g. red used to start a race), these are generally accepted for today.
! Flag
! Displayed from start tower
! Displayed from observation post
The race has started or resumed after a full caution or stop, or the race is proceeding normally.
End of hazardous section of track.
Full course caution condition for ovals. On road courses, it means a local area of caution. Depending on the type of racing, either two yellow flags will be used for a full course caution or a sign with 'SC' (Safety car) will be used as the field follows the pace safety car on track and no cars may pass.
Local caution condition no cars may pass at the particular corner where being displayed.
Debris or slippery patches on the track.
The car with the indicated number must pit.
The session is halted all cars on course must return to pit lane.
The car with the indicated number has mechanical trouble.
The driver of the car with the indicated number has been penalized for misbehaviour.
The driver of the car with the indicated number is disqualified or will not be scored until they report to the pits.
A car must allow another car to pass if the flag is blue only. With an orange or yellow stripe, it simply serves as a warning that faster traffic is behind.
A car is being advised to give way to faster traffic approaching.
The race is stopped all cars must halt on the track or return to pit lane.
One lap remains.
A slow vehicle is on the track.
The race has concluded.
Accidents
For the worst accident in racing history see Pierre Levegh.
See also
Engine tuning
Import scene
List of Auto Racing tracks
Race track
Racing game
Reading spark plugs for racing
Sim racing
External links
http: www.trackbytes.com Full coverage of SPEED World Challenge and American Le Mans Series
http: www.autosport.com AutoSport Magazine
http: www.speedtv.com SPEED TV Network
http: www.motorstv.com Motors TV Network
Sports car pictures and specifications
http: www.rennleitung.de: Rennleitung
http: www.motorsport.com: Covering All Forms of Auto Racing
http: www.britishmotorracingsafetyfund.org Promoting safety and raising money for the Sport in the UK
http: www.racerweek.com: F1, NASCAR Rally racing forums
http: www.formula1review.com: F1 news, results, statistics, motorsports forum
covers a wide range of Sportscar Racing series , including ALMS Grand AM
F1 Talking
! interwiki
af:Motorsport
cs:Motorsport
de:Automobilsport
eo:A tosporto
es:Automovilismo
et:Autosport
fa:
fr:Comp tition automobile
hr:Automobilizam
it:Automobilismo
ja:
ko:
lt:Autosportas
mk:
nl:Autosport
no:Motorsport
pl:Wy cig samochodowy
pt:Automobilismo
ro:Automobilism
ru:
uk:
zh:
used by anarcho capitalists
'''Anarcho capitalism''' (aka '''free market anarchism''') is a philosophy based on the idea of individual sovereignty, and a prohibition against initiatory coercion and fraud. It sees the only just basis for law as arising from private property norms and an unlimited right of contract between sovereign individuals. From this basis, anarcho capitalism rejects the state as an unjustified monopolist and systematic aggressor against sovereign individuals, and embraces anti statist laissez faire capitalism. Anarcho capitalists would aim to protect individual liberty and property by replacing a government monopoly, which is involuntarily funded through taxation, with private, competing businesses that use physical force only in defense of liberty and property against aggressors. Hence, they believe that all goods and services, including law, order, and security, should be supplied through the mechanism of a free market.
The philosophy embraces stateless capitalism as one of its foundational principles. The first well known version of anarcho capitalism to identify itself thus was developed by economists of the Austrian School and libertarians Murray Rothbard and Walter Block in the mid 20th century, synthesizing elements from Austrian School economics, classical liberalism and 19th century American individualist anarchism. While Rothbard bases his philosophy on natural law, others, such as David Friedman, take a pragmatic consequentialist approach by arguing that anarcho capitalism should be implemented because such a system would have consequences superior to alternatives.
Because of this embrace of capitalism, there is considerable tension between anarcho capitalists and anarchists who see the rejection of capitalism as being just as essential to anarchist philosophy as rejection of the state. Despite this tension, many anarcho capitalists have identified their philosophy as evolving from the tradition of American individualist anarchists such as Benjamin Tucker and Lysander Spooner.
Anarcho capitalism can be considered a radical development of classical liberalism. Its grounding in liberalism stems from Gustave de Molinari. Many proponents of anarcho capitalism, including Rothbard, argue that Molinari was the first anarcho capitalist. However, Rothbard admitted that "Molinari did not use the terminology, and probably would have balked at the name" anarcho capitalist. Nonetheless, Molinari did argue for a free market, privatization of security, and did not oppose profit. His thoughts were influential on Rothbard and his contemporaries.
Philosophy
The nonaggression axiom
align "right" class "box" style "margin left: 15px text align: left border: 3px solid aaaaaa padding: 2px font size: 80 width: 25 "
bgcolor " dbeaff"
The term ''anarcho capitalism'' was most likely coined in the mid 1950s by the economist Murray Rothbard.refRothbard, Murray N. (1988) "What's Wrong with Liberty Poll or, How I Became a Libertarian", Liberty, July 1988, p.53 ref Other terms used for this philosophy include:
capitalist anarchism
anti state capitalism
anarcho liberalism
stateless capitalism
the private law societyref name Hoppe 2001Hoppe, Hans Hermann (2001) Retrieved 23 May 2005 ref
radical capitalismref name Hoppe 2001
right anarchismrefWall, Richard (2004) Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref
market anarchism
free market anarchism
private property anarchyref name Hoppe 2001
stateless liberalism
voluntaryism
. According to a theory associated with the economist David Friedman, medieval Icelandic society was anarcho capitalist. Chieftancies could be bought and sold, and were not geographical monopolies individuals could voluntarily choose membership in any chieftan's clan.
Anarcho capitalism, as formulated by Rothbard and others, holds strongly to the central libertarian ''nonaggression axiom'':
: ... The basic axiom of libertarian political theory holds that every man is a selfowner, having absolute jurisdiction over his own body. In effect, this means that no one else may justly invade, or aggress against, another's person. It follows then that each person justly owns whatever previously unowned resources he appropriates or "mixes his labor with." From these twin axioms self ownership and "homesteading" stem the justification for the entire system of property rights titles in a free market society. This system establishes the right of every man to his own person, the right of donation, of bequest (and, concomitantly, the right to receive the bequest or inheritance), and the right of contractual exchange of property titles.refRothbard, Murray N. (1982) Cato Journal 2, No. 1 (Spring 1982): pp. 55 99. Retrieved 20 May 2005 ref
In general, the nonaggression axiom can be said to be a prohibition against the initiation of force, or the threat of force, against persons (i.e., direct violence, assault, murder) or property (i.e., fraud, burglary, theft, taxation).refRothbard, Murray N. (1973) Collier Books, A Division of Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York: pp.24 25. Retrieved 20 May 2005 ref The initiation of force is usually referred to as aggression or coercion. The difference between anarcho capitalists and other libertarians is largely one of the degree to which they take this axiom. Minarchist libertarians, such as most people involved in Libertarian political parties, would retain the state in some smaller and less invasive form, retaining public police, courts and military. In contrast, anarcho capitalists reject any level of state intervention, defining the state as a coercive monopoly and, as the only entity in human society that derives its income from legal aggression, an entity that inherently violates the central axiom of libertarianism.ref name Rothbard 1982.2Rothbard, Murray N. (1982) Humanities Press ISBN 0814775063:p162 Retrieved 20 May 2005 ref Some, such as Rothbard, accept the nonaggression axiom on an intrinsic moral or natural law basis. Others, such as Friedman, take a consequentialist or egoist approach rather than maintaining that aggression is intrinsically immoral, they maintain that a law against aggression can only come about by contract between self interested parties who agree to refrain from initiating coercion against each other. It is in terms of the non aggression principle that Rothbard defined anarchism he defined "anarchism as a system which provides no legal sanction for such aggression 'against person and property' " and said that "what anarchism proposes to do, then, is to abolish the State, i.e. to abolish the regularized institution of aggressive coercion." refRothbard, Murray N. (1975) ''Libertarian Forum'' newsletter (January 1975) ref In an interview with ''New Banner'', Rothbard said that "capitalism is the fullest expression of anarchism, and anarchism is the fullest expression of capitalism." ref The New Banner: A Fortnightly Libertarian Journal (25 February 1972) ref
Original appropriation
Central to anarcho capitalism are the concepts of self ownership and original appropriation:
blockquoteEveryone is the proper owner of his own physical body as well as of all places and nature given goods that he occupies and puts to use by means of his body, provided only that no one else has already occupied or used the same places and goods before him. This ownership of "originally appropriated" places and goods by a person implies his right to use and transform these places and goods in any way he sees fit, provided only that he does not change thereby uninvitedly the physical integrity of places and goods originally appropriated by another person. In particular, once a place or good has been first appropriated by, in John Locke's phrase, 'mixing one's labor' with it, ownership in such places and goods can be acquired only by means of a voluntary contractual transfer of its property title from a previous to a later owner.ref name Hoppe 2002Hoppe, Hans Hermann (2002) Retrieved 23 May 2005 ref blockquote
align "left" class "box" style "margin right: 15px text align: left border: 3px solid aaaaaa padding: 4px font size: 85 width: 240px "
bgcolor " dbeaff"
Anarcho capitalism uses the following terms in ways that may differ from common usage or various anarchist movements::
'''Anarchism:''' any philosophy that opposes all forms of initiatory coercion (includes opposition to the State)
'''Contract:''' a voluntary binding agreement between persons
'''Coercion:''' physical force or threat of such against persons or property
'''Capitalism:''' economic system where the means of production are privately owned, and where investments, production, distribution, income, and prices are determined through the operation of a free market rather than by government
'''Free market:''' a market where all decisions regarding transfer of money, goods (including capital goods), and services are voluntary
'''Fraud:''' inducing one to part with something of value through the use of dishonesty
'''State:''' an organization that taxes and engages in regularized and instutionalized aggressive coercion
'''Voluntary:''' any action not influenced by coercion or fraud perpetrated by any human agency
This is the root of anarcho capitalist property rights, and where they differ from collectivist forms of anarchism. Original appropriation allows an individual to claim any "unused" property, including land, and by improving or otherwise using it, own it with the same absolute right as his own body. According to Rothbard, original appropriation of land is not legitimate by merely claiming it or building a fence around it it is only by ''using'' land by mixing one's labor with it that original appropriation is legitimized: "Any attempt to claim a new resource that someone does not use would have to be considered invasive of the property right of whoever the first user will turn out to be."ref name Rothbard 1962Rothbard, Murray N. (1962) Ludwig von Mises Institute ISBN 0945466307 ch2 Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref As a practical matter, in terms of the ownership of land, anarcho capitalists recognize that there are few (if any) parcels of land left on Earth whose ownership was not at some point in time transferred as the result of coercion, usually through seizure by some form of state. However, unless records and titles exist to confirm the theft and the rightful individual owner most do not believe that this history de legitimizes current ownerships which are based on consensual transactions. They believe it is wrong to attempt to remedy past coercion by the use of present coercion (i.e., seizure or eviction).
By accepting an axiomatic definition of private property and property rights, anarcho capitalists deny the legitimacy of a state on principle:
:"For, apart from ruling out as unjustified all activities such as murder, homicide, rape, trespass, robbery, burglary, theft, and fraud, the ethics of private property is also incompatible with the existence of a state defined as an agency that possesses a compulsory territorial monopoly of ultimate decision making (jurisdiction) and or the right to tax."ref name Hoppe 2002
The contractual society
The society envisioned by anarcho capitalists has been called the ''Contractual Society'' " ... a society based purely on voluntary action, entirely un hampered by violence or threats of violence."ref name Rothbard 1962 Because this system relies on voluntary agreements (contracts) between individuals as the only legal framework, it is difficult to predict precisely what the particulars of this society would look like. Those particulars are disputed both among anarcho capitalists and between them and their critics.
One particular ramification is that transfer of property and services must be voluntary on the part of ''both'' parties. No external entities can force an individual to accept or deny a particular transaction. An employer might offer insurance and death benefits to same sex couples another might refuse to recognize any union outside his or her own faith. Individuals would be free to enter into contractual agreements as they saw fit, allowing discrimination or favoritism based on language, race, gender, sexual orientation, or any other categorization. Anarcho capitalists maintain that the social structure would be self regulating, since any disenfranchised group can avail themselves of boycott or protest, and other entrepreneurs will see their own interests (i.e., profit) in servicing the group.
Another important ramification is the fact that any social structure is permissible under anarcho capitalism as long as it is formed by a contract between individuals. Therefore, radically different "governments" and subeconomies can form, creating a panarchic society. Individuals could live in a privately owned democracy, a republic, or even a monarchy if they so choose.
One social structure that is not permissible under anarcho capitalism is one that attempts to claim greater sovereignty than the individuals that form it. The state is a prime example, but another is the modern corporation defined as a legal entity that exists under a different legal code than individuals as a means to shelter the individuals who own and run the corporation from possible legal consequences of acts by the corporation. It is worth noting that Rothbard allows a narrower definition of a corporation: "Corporations are not at all monopolistic privileges they are free associations of individuals pooling their capital. On the purely free market, such men would simply announce to their creditors that their liability is limited to the capital specifically invested in the corporation ... ."ref name Rothbard 1962 However, this is a very narrow definition that only shelters owners from debt by creditors that specifically agree to the arrangement it also does not shelter other liability, such as from malfeasance or other wrongdoing.
There are limits to the right to contract under some interpretations of anarcho capitalism. Rothbard himself asserts that the right to contract is based in inalienable human rights,ref name Rothbard 1982.2 and therefore any contract that implicitly violates those rights can be voided at will, which would, for instance, prevent a person from permanently selling himself into slavery. Other interpretations conclude that banning such contracts would in itself be an unacceptably invasive interference in the right to contract.ref name Nozick 1973Nozick, Robert (1973) ''Anarchy, State, and Utopia'' ref
Private law and order
Anarcho capitalists only believe in collective defense of individual liberty (i.e., courts, military or police forces) insofar as such groups are formed and paid for on an explicitly voluntary basis. According to Molinari, "Under a regime of liberty, the natural organization of the security industry would not be different from that of other industries."ref name Molinari 1849Molinari, Gustave de (1849) ''(trans. J. Huston McCulloch)'' Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref Proponents point out that private systems of justice and defense ''already'' exist, naturally forming where the market is allowed to compensate for the failure of the state: private arbitration, security guards, neighborhood watch groups, and so on.ref name Friedman 1973Friedman, David D. (1973) ''The Machinery of Freedom: Guide to a Radical Capitalism'' Harper ref These private courts and police are sometimes referred to generically as Private Defense Agencies (PDAs.)
The defense of those unable to pay for such protection might be financed by charitable organizations relying on voluntary donation rather than by state institutions relying on coercive taxation, or by cooperative self help by groups of individuals.
Retributive justice, meaning retaliatory force, is often a component of the contracts imagined for an anarcho capitalist society. Some believe prisons or indentured servitude would be justifiable institutions to deal with those who violate anarcho capitalist property relations, while others believe exile or forced restitution are sufficient.refO'Keeffe, Matthew (1989) Legal Notes No.5, Libertarian Alliance ISBN 1870614224 Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref
The use of force
The axiom of nonaggression is not necessarily a pacifist doctrine it is a prohibition against the '''initiation''' of (interpersonal) force. Like classical liberalism, anarcho capitalism permits the use of force, as long as it is in the defense of persons or property.
However, the permissible extent of this defensive use of force is an arguable point among anarcho capitalists. Some argue that the initiator of any aggressive act should be subject to a retributive counterattack beyond what is solely necessary to repel the aggression. The counterargument is that such a counterattack is only legitimate insofar as it was defined in an agreement between the parties.
Another controversial application of "defensive" aggression is the act of revolutionary violence against tyrannical regimes. Many anarcho capitalists admire the American Revolution as the legitimate act of individuals working together to fight against tyrannical restrictions of their liberties. In fact, according to Murray Rothbard, the American Revolutionary War was the only war involving the United States that could be justified.refRothbard, Murray N. (1973) ''Reason'' Feb 1973, Retrieved 10 August 2005 ref But, illustrating their general ambivalence toward war, these same people also sharply criticize the revolutionaries for the means used taxes, conscription, inflationary money and the inadequacy of the result: a state.
While some anarcho capitalists believe forceful resistance and revolutionary violence against the state is legitimate, most believe the use of force is a dangerous tool at best, and that violent insurrection should be a last resort.
Conflicts within anarcho capitalist theory
There is dispute on whether anarcho capitalism is properly justifiable on deontological or consequentialist grounds. Natural law anarcho capitalism (such as that advocated by Rothbard) holds that rights can be determined through natural law and that consequences are not relevant to their determination. Consequentialists such as Friedman disagree, maintaining that rights are merely human constructs that rational humans create through contract as a result of concluding what sort of system leads to the best consequences. Many anarcho capitalists also hold a subjective theory of rights, maintaining that the lack of a positive right to aggress is sufficient to hold up the derivative claims of the nonaggression principle.
Friedman describes an economic approach to anarcho capitalism. His description differs with Rothbard's because it does not use moral arguments i.e., it does not appeal to a theory of natural rights to justify itself. In Friedman's work, the economic argument is sufficient to derive the principles of anarcho capitalism. Private defense or protection agencies and courts not only defend legal rights but supply the actual content of these rights and all claims on the free market. People will have the law system they pay for, and because of economic efficiency considerations resulting from individuals' utility functions, such law will tend to be libertarian in nature but will differ from place to place and from agency to agency depending on the tastes of the people who buy the law. Also unlike other anarcho capitalists, most notably Rothbard, Friedman has never tried to deny the theoretical cogency of the neoclassical literature on "market failure," nor has he been inclined to attack economic efficiency as a normative benchmark.ref name Friedman 1973
Anarchism and anarcho capitalism
Dispute over the name "anarchism"
Many anarchists strongly argue that anarcho capitalism is not a form of anarchism, since they believe capitalism to be inherently authoritarian. Joe Peacott has explicitly stated that individualist anarchism is anti capitalist, and contrasts it to anarcho capitalism.refPeacott, Joe (2003), ref. However, many individualists do not see their philosophy as a "class war" but a war against government repression of ''individual'' liberty. Murray Rothbard argues that an "anarchist society is one where there is no legal possibility for coercive aggression against the person or property of any individual." Whether anarcho capitalism is a true form of anarchism may depend on the meaning of the words "anarchism" and "capitalism".
Adherents of the traditional schools of anarchism reject the term "anarcho capitalism". They oppose both the state and capitalism as coercive institutions, since " " in Greek means "without rulers". Conversely, many, including capitalist libertarians and anarcho capitalists, use the term "anarchism" with a definition that simply means "without the State".
Also, there is some terminological disagreement regarding "capitalism". ! SOURCE GIVEN IS IRRELEVANT, DOES NOT MATCH CLAIM According to individualist anarchist Larry Gambone, when the traditional anarchists use the term "capitalism", they are referring to those who have "gained wealth from the use of governmental power or from privileges granted by government."refGambone, Larry (1998) ''Total Liberty'' Volume 1 Number 3 Autumn 1998, Retrieved 10 August 2005 ref According to Wendy McElroy, when traditional individualist anarchists referred to "capitalism" they "meant ''state capitalism'', the alliance of government and business."refMcElroy, Wendy (1999) ref However, modern individualist anarchists like Gambone believe that capitalism, as they define it, requires the presence of the state in order to function. Therefore, for the individualist anarchist, the concept of rejecting "state capitalism" would be equivalent to rejection of all capitalism.
Hence, anarcho capitalists depart from individualist anarchists on what constitutes concepts such as the "state", "capitalism", and a "free market". Jamal Hannah says that most anarchists and capitalists agree with the individualists in believing that capitalist economics require a state to defend private wealth.ref''Anarchy list", Hannah, Jamal (Dec 1999) ref Despite disagreeing on whether or not anti state capitalism is a coherent concept, most anarchists oppose a state and support private defence of wealth.
Morever, the common definition of capitalism has changed over time. Anarchist movements of early origin operated with a definition unlike contemporary definitions. For example, the 1909 Century Dictionary defined capitalism as "1. The state of having capital or property possession of capital. 2. The concentration or massing of capital in the hands of a few also, the power or influence of large or combined capital." In contrast, the contemporary Merriam Webster Dictionary (unabridged) refers to capitalism as "an economic system characterized by private or corporation ownership of capital goods, by investments that are determined by private decision rather than by state control, and by prices, production, and the distribution of goods that are determined mainly in a free market."
According to , capitalism is an economic plutocracy that includes its own hierarchy. They place anarcho capitalism outside of the anarchist movement, and into the classical liberal tradition "Plutarchy without statism liberalism." Some, while accepting that anarcho capitalism is a radical form of liberalism, question the coherence of such a statement, holding that if socialism and communism can have anarchist forms, then liberalism can as well.refGarner, Richard A. (2002) ''Ifeminists Newsletter'' May 14 2002 ref Often, anarchist individualism is regarded as a form of socialism (for example, by individualist anarchists such as E. ArmandrefArmand, E. (1907), Anarchist Individualism as Life and Activity ref). However, American individualist anarchism is sometimes regarded as a form of "liberal anarchism."refWeisbord, Albert (1937) from ''The Conquest of Power'' (1937) refrefhttp: www.bkmarcus.com blog 2004 11 liberal anarchism.html refrefhttp: homepage.mac.com dmhart ComteDunoyer Ch1fn.html ref Also, as anarchists by definition favor voluntary interaction, anarcho capitalists and their opponents disagree on whether certain actions are voluntary (see sidebar for definitions).
Some anarchists espouse a form of labor theory of value, which they put forth as one reason that profit, rent, and wage labour are exploitive. While classical capitalists such as Adam Smith also accepted the labor theory of value, most modern economists, including anarcho capitalists, argue that value is subjective and adhere to marginalism.
"Left" and "Right" anarchism
The divide between anarcho capitalism and traditional anarchism has been termed as left anarchism versus right anarchism by some individuals, such as Ulrike Heider, who placed anarcho capitalism on the far right.refHeider, Ulrike (1994) City Lights Books ISBN 0872862895 Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref Most contemporary anarcho capitalists reject the standard linear model of ideologies in favor of a multidimensional model with a liberty authority dimension, though some of their opponents maintain that anarchism itself is a left wing ideology.
History and influences
(1819 1912)
Liberalism
Anarcho capitalist philosophy has been influenced by many sources. The primary influence with the longest history is classical liberalism. Classical liberals have had two main themes since John Locke first expounded the philosophy: the liberty of man, and limitations of state power. The liberty of man was expressed in terms of natural rights, while limiting the state was based (for Locke) on a consent theory. While Locke saw the state as evolving from society via a social contract, later, more radical liberals saw a fundamental schism between society, the "natural" voluntary interactions of men, and state, the institution of brute force.
In the 18th century, liberal revolutionaries in Britain and America had opposed statism without grounding it in theory, while some French economists had theorized it without endorsing it. In the 19th century, classical liberals led the attack against statism. One notable was Frederic Bastiat (''The Law''), who wrote, "The state is the great fiction by which everybody seeks to live at the expense of everybody else." Henry David Thoreau's liberalism might be considered evolutionary anarchism, as he wrote, "I heartily accept the motto, 'That government is best which governs least' and I should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systematically. Carried out, it finally amounts to this, which also I believe, 'That government is best which governs not at all' and when men are prepared for it, that will be the kind of government which they will have."refThoreau, Henry David (1849) ref
One of the first liberals to discuss the possibility of privatizing protection of individual liberty and property was France's Jakob Mauvillon in the 18th century. Later, in the 1840s, Julius Faucher and Gustave de Molinari advocated the same. Molinari, in his essay ''The Production of Security'', argued, "No government should have the right to prevent another government from going into competition with it, or to require consumers of security to come exclusively to it for this commodity." Molinari and this new type of anti state liberal grounded their reasoning on liberal ideals and classical economics. Historian Ralph Raico asserts what that these liberal philosophers "had come up with was a form of individualist anarchism, or, as it would be called today, anarcho capitalism or market anarchism."refRaico, Ralph (2004) Ecole Polytechnique, Centre de Recherce en Epistemologie Appliquee, Unit associ e au CNRS ref Unlike the liberalism of Locke, which saw the state as evolving from society, the anti state liberals saw a fundamental conflict between the voluntary interactions of people society and the institutions of force the State. This ''society versus state'' idea was expressed in various ways: natural society vs. artificial society, liberty vs. authority, society of contract vs. society of authority, and industrial society vs. militant society, just to name a few.ref name Molinari 1849 The anti state liberal tradition in Europe and the United States continued after Molinari in the early writings of Herbert Spencer, as well as in thinkers such as Paul mile de Puydt and Auberon Herbert.
Later, in the early 20th century, the mantle of anti state liberalism was taken by the "Old Right". These were minarchist, antiwar, anti imperialist, and (later) anti New Dealers. Some of the most notable members of the Old Right were Albert Jay Nock, Rose Wilder Lane, Isabel Paterson, Frank Chodorov, Garet Garrett, and H. L. Mencken. In the 1950s, the new "fusion conservatism", also called "cold war conservatism", took hold of the right wing in the U.S., stressing anti communism. This induced the libertarian Old Right to split off from the right, and seek alliances with the (now left wing) antiwar movement, and to start specifically libertarian organizations such as the (U.S.) Libertarian Party.
American individualist anarchism
(1808 87)
:''Main articles: American individualist anarchism, American individualist anarchism and anarcho capitalism''
Anarcho capitalism is influenced by the work of the 19th century American individualist anarchists. Rothbard sought to meld the 19th century individualist theory with the principles of Austrian economics: "There is, in the body of thought known as 'Austrian economics', a scientific explanation of the workings of the free market (and of the consequences of government intervention in that market) which individualist anarchists could easily incorporate into their political and social Weltanschauung" (''Egalitarianism''). The 19th century individualist anarchists espoused a labor theory of value, while the anarcho capitalists adhere to a subjective theory, leading to differences over the legitimacy of profit. Anarchist historian Peter Marshall believes that anarcho capitalists selectively interpret individualist anarchists texts, overlooking egalitarian implications. refhttp: dwardmac.pitzer.edu dward newrightanarchocap.html ref However, Marshall may have overlooked that the most noted individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker explicitly supports the right to inequality in wealth and upholds it as the natural result of libertyref ref. Tucker did, although, oppose vast concentrations of wealth which he believed were made possible by government intervention which protected monopoly. He believed the most dangerous intervention was the protection of a "banking monopoly" which concentrated capital in the hands of the privileged elite. Though, he also argued that harmful monopolies that were created by government intervention could be maintained in the absence of government protection because of the accumulation of great wealth (see predatory pricing). Anarcho capitalists also oppose governmental restrictions on banking. They, like all Austrian economists, believe that monopoly can only come about through government intervention. Most modern individualists, following in the footsteps of historical counterparts, reject capitalism in the sense of government backed privilege for capital. Individualists anarchists have long argued that monopoly on credit and land interferes with the functioning of a free market economy. Although anarcho capitalists disagree on the critical topic of profit, both schools of thought agree on other issues. Of particular importance to anarcho capitalists and the individualists are the ideas of private property, "sovereignty of the individual", a market economy, and the opposition to collectivism. In addition, like the individualists, anarcho capitalists believe that land may be originally appropriated by, and only by, occupation or use however, most traditional individualists believe it must ''continually'' be in use to retain title. Notable 19th century American individualist anarchists include Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker.
Lysander Spooner's articles, such as and the , were widely reprinted in early anarcho capitalist journals, and his ideas especially his individualist critique of the state and his defense of the right to ignore or withdraw from it were often cited by anarcho capitalists. Spooner was staunchly opposed to government interference in economic matters, and supported a "right to acquire property ... as one of the natural, inherent, inalienable rights of men ... one which government has no power to infringe ... ".refSpooner, Lysander (1843) Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref Like all anarchists, he opposed government regulation: "All legislative restraints upon the rate of interest are arbitrary and tyrannical restraints upon a man's natural capacity amid natural right to hire capital, upon which to bestow his labor."refSpooner, Lysander (1846) Retrieved 19 May 2005 ref He was particularly vocal, however, in opposing any collusion between banks and government, and argued that the monopolistic privileges that the government granted to a few bankers were the source of many social and economic ills.
Benjamin Tucker supported private ownership of the product of labor, which he believed entailed a rejection of both collective and capitalist ownership. He was a staunch advocate of the mutualist form of recompensing labor, which holds to "Cost the limit of price". He also advocated a free market economy, which he believed was prohibited by capitalist monopoly of credit and land backed by the state. He believed that anyone who wishes should be allowed to engage in the banking business and issue their private currency without needing special permission from government, and that unused land should not be restricted to those who wished to use it. He believed that if these and other coercive actions were eliminated that profit in economic transactions would be rendered nearly impossible because of increased availability of capital to all individuals and resulting increased competition in business. Accepting the labor theory of value and the resulting "cost principle" as a premise marks one of mutualism's main conflicts with anarcho capitalism. Although his self identification as a socialist and sympathy for the labor movement led to hostility from some early anarcho capitalists such as Robert LeFevre, others, such as Murray Rothbard, embraced his critique of the state and claimed that he defined his "socialism" not in terms of opposition to a free market or private property, but in opposition to government privileges for business. However, individualists argue that capitalism cannot be maintained in the absence of the state. For example, Kevin Carson argues, "As a mutualist anarchist, I believe that expropriation of surplus value i.e., capitalism cannot occur without state coercion to maintain the privilege of usurer, landlord, and capitalist. It was for this reason that the free market mutualist Benjamin Tucker from whom right libertarians selectively borrow regarded himself as a libertarian socialist." Tucker characterized the economic demands of Proudhon and Warren by saying, "though opposed to socializing the ownership of capital, they aimed nevertheless to socialize its effects by making its use beneficial to all instead of a means of impoverishing the many to enrich the few ... Absolute Free Trade free trade at home, as well as with foreign countries the logical carrying out of the Manchester doctrine ''laissez faire'' the universal rule."refTucker, Benjamin (1888) Liberty 5.16, no. 120 (10 March 1888), pp. 2 3.Retrieved 20 May 2005 ref
Anarcho capitalism is sometimes viewed by those sympathetic to it as a form of individualist anarchism, despite the fact that the original individualist anarchists universally rejected capitalism (i.e., they opposed profit, which is seen as a fundamental characteristic of capitalism). Organizations such as mutualist.org remain dedicated to "free market anticapitalism," while individualists like Larry Gambone explicitly state that all capitalism is state capitalism. Nonetheless, anarcho capitalist Wendy McElroy considers herself to be an individualist, while admitting that the original individualists were universally anticapitalist. In addition, historian Guglielmo Piombini refers anarcho capitalism as a form of individualist anarchism, though he offers no support for this statement. Collectivist anarchist author Iain McKay and historian Peter Sabatini both argue that anarcho capitalism is fundamentally opposed to individualist anarchism.
The similarity to anarcho capitalism in regard to private defense of liberty and property is probably best seen in a quote by 19th century individualist anarchist Victor Yarros:
blockquoteAnarchism means no government, but it does not mean no laws and no coercion. This may seem paradoxical, but the paradox vanishes when the Anarchist definition of government is kept in view. Anarchists oppose government, not because they disbelieve in punishment of crime and resistance to aggression, but because they disbelieve in compulsory protection. Protection and taxation without consent is itself invasion hence Anarchism favors a system of voluntary taxation and protection.refYarros, Victor ''Our Revolution Essays and Interpretations'' p.80 ref blockquote
The Austrian School
(1926 95)
The Austrian School of economics was founded with the publication of Carl Menger's 1871 book ''Principles of Economics''. Members of this school approach economics as an ''a priori'' system like logic or mathematics, rather than as an empirical science like geology. It attempts to discover axioms of human action (called "praxeology" in the Austrian tradition) and make deductions therefrom. Some of these praxeological axioms are:
: Humans act purposefully.
: Humans prefer more of a good to less.
: Humans prefer to receive a good sooner rather than later.
: Each party to a trade benefits ''ex ante''.
These are macro level generalizations, or heuristics, which are true for the many, but not necessarily true for any particular person.
Even in the early days, Austrian economics was used as a theoretical weapon against socialism and statist socialist policy. Eugen von B hm Bawerk, a colleague of Menger, wrote one of the first critiques of socialism ever written in his treatise ''The Exploitation Theory of Socialism Communism''. Later, Friedrich Hayek wrote ''The Road to Serfdom'', asserting that a command economy destroys the information function of prices, and that authority over the economy leads to totalitarianism. Another very influential Austrian economist was Ludwig von Mises, author of the praxeological work ''Human Action''.
Murray Rothbard, a student of Mises, is the man who attempted to meld Austrian economics with classical liberalism and individualist anarchism, and is credited with coining the term "anarcho capitalism". He was probably the first to use "libertarian" in its current (U.S.) pro capitalist sense. He was a trained economist, but also knowledgeable in history and political philosophy. When young, he considered himself part of the Old Right, an anti statist and anti interventionist branch of the U.S. Republican party. When interventionist cold warriors of the ''National Review'', such as William Buckley, gained influence in the Republican party in the 1950s, Rothbard quit that group and formed an alliance with left wing antiwar groups. Later, Rothbard was a founder of the U.S. Libertarian Party. In the late 1950s, Rothbard was briefly involved with Ayn Rand's objectivism group, but later had a falling out. Rothbard's books, such as ''Man, Economy, and State'', ''Power and Market'', ''The Ethics of Liberty'', and ''For a New Liberty'', are considered by some to be classics of natural law libertarian thought.
''See also:'' Roberta Modugno Crocetta:
! All this is not cited.
Objectivism
Though Ayn Rand was opposed to anarcho capitalism, some anarcho capitalist and libertarian followers, including Rothbard, see Ayn Rand as one of their most vocal and visible champions. Through her philosophy of objectivism, Rand firmly grounded laissez faire capitalism on her ethical system of Reason, Self interest, and Individualism. She, however, explicitly rejected the idea of competing private defense institutions. Some anarcho capitalists derive much of their philosophical inspirations from Rand's arguments. Rand was adamant that the government did play a necessary and important role in society, that of policing the society, protecting individual rights, and stepping into an aggressor role only in retaliation, self defense or defense of the country.
Anarcho capitalism in the real world
interpretation of the Althing in the Icelandic Commonwealth, which authors such as David Friedman and Roderick Long believe to have been a functioning anarcho capitalist society.
Anarcho capitalism is largely theoretical, and even sympathetic critics say that it is unlikely ever to be more than a utopian ideal. Despite this, some anarcho capitalist philosophers point to actual societies to support their claim that stateless capitalism can function in practice.
Medieval Iceland
According to David Friedman, "Medieval Icelandic institutions have several peculiar and interesting characteristics they might almost have been invented by a mad economist to test the lengths to which market systems could supplant government in its most fundamental functions."ref name Friedman 79Friedman, David D. (1979) , Retrieved 12 August 2005 ref He argues that the Icelandic Commonwealth between 930 and 1262 had some of the features of an anarcho capitalist society while there was a single legal system, enforcement of law was entirely private and so provides some evidence of how such a society would function. "Even where the Icelandic legal system recognized an essentially "public" offense, it dealt with it by giving some individual (in some cases chosen by lot from those affected) the right to pursue the case and collect the resulting fine, thus fitting it into an essentially private system."ref name Friedman 79 refhttp: www.gettysburg.edu academics english vikingstudies jackson researchdocument.html ref
However, some disagree with this assessment, arguing that Medieval Iceland was a communal rather than individualist society '' p eople of a communitarian nature... have reason to be attracted to Medieval Iceland ... The economy barely knew the existence of markets. Social relations preceded economic relations. '' refWilliam Ian Miller, "Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law and Society in Saga Iceland", p. 306 ref and that when a free market finally did arise, that it was the cause of the end of the republic ''"During the 12th century, wealth and power began to accumulate in the hands of a few chiefs, and by 1220, six prominent families ruled the entire country. It was the internecine power struggle among these families, shrewdly exploited by King Haakon IV of Norway, that finally brought the old republic to an end."'' refHallberg Hallmundsson, an article on Iceland in the "Encyclopaedia Americana" ref
Modern Somalia
, 1992, one year after the collapse of the government. Somalia is cited by some anarcho capitalists as an example how stateless capitalism is possible.
More recently, Somalia is cited by some as a real world example of how a stateless capitalist economy and a legal system can develop organically. Since 1991, Somalia as a whole has had no functioning central government, and therefore no regulations or licensing requirements for businesses, and no taxes on businesses or individuals. One World Bank study reports that "it may be easier than is commonly thought for basic systems of finance and some infrastructure services to function where government is extremely weak or absent."ref name WorldBank 2004Nenova, Tatiana and Harford, Tim (2004) Public Policy Journal Note Number 280, Retrieved 12 August 2005 ref Journalist Kevin Sites, after a recent trip to Somalia, reported: "Somalia, though brutally poor, is a kind of libertarian's dream. Free enterprise flourishes, and vigorous commercial competition is the only form of regulation. Somalia has some of the best telecommunications in Africa, with a handful of companies ready to wire home or office and provide crystal clear service, including international long distance, for about 10 a month." One of the poorest countries in the world in 1991, Somalia remains a very poor country. However, wealth distribution appears to be more uniform than in other African countries. When extreme poverty was last measured in 1998 (percentage of individuals living on less than PPP 1 a day), it was faring better than wealthier West African and neighboring countries.ref name WorldBank 2004
In the absence of a state and business regulations the private sector has flourished. One business sector that is said to be doing well is telecommunications. Abdullahi Mohammed Hussein of Telecom Somalia says "The government post and telecoms company used to have a monopoly but after the regime was toppled, we were free to set up our own business" (). Also, in 1989, before the collapse of the government, the national airline had only one airplane. Now there are approximately 15 airlines, over 60 aircraft, 6 international destinations, and more domestic routes. Electricity is now furnished by entrepreneurs, who have purchased generators and divided cities into manageable sectors (''''). With the collapse of the central government, the educations system is now private and includes universities such as Mogadishu University. A World Bank study reports "modest gains in education." As last measured in 2001, primary school enrollment, which stood at 17 , was nearly at prewar levels, and secondary school enrollment had been increasing since 1998. However, "adult literacy is estimated to have declined from the already low level of 24 in 1989 to 17.1 in 2001" (). A more recent 2003 study reported that the literacy rate had risen to 19 (). A statistic from 2000 indicated that only 21 of the population had access to safe drinking water at that time. The impact of collapse of the government and ensuing civil war on human development in Somalia has been profound, resulting in the collapse of political institutions, the destruction of social and economic infrastructure, and massive internal and external migrations."refWorld Bank Advisory Committee for Somalia (2003), retrived 4 November 2005 ref
An essential element of anarcho capitalist theory is that private businesses should protect individual liberty and property rather than tax funded institutions. As such, the Somali situation falls short of being anarcho capitalism as it is it is severely lacking in such options. Though some urban areas such as Mogadishu have private police and are relatively saferef ref, crime is rampant in other areas according to some . Businessmen in Mogadishu have organized to fund private police that patrol the city streets for petty crimeref ref. There is a rudimentary legal system which has been called "a free market for the supply, adjudication and enforcement of law."refvan Notten, Michael (2000) , Retrieved 12 August 2005 ref It remains to be seen if private solutions develop to the point of providing high quality security.
While most of what was Somalia is a stateless area, two internationally unrecognized democratic states exist in its north. These are Somaliland and Puntland, which are ruled by governments. These regions lack the armed competition in the more anarchic south, and the destruction this causes. Their people are correspondingly more prosperous on average. This is seen by many as evidence that competition in security should not be allowed.
Criticisms of anarcho capitalism
:''For critiques of libertarianism in general, see: Criticism of libertarianism''
:''For critiques of capitalism from an anarchist (libertarian socialist) perspective, see: Anarchism and capitalism''
:''For the spectrum of political ideologies in relation to capitalism see: Capitalism and related political ideologies''
Anarcho capitalism is a radical development of liberalism. Therefore, the same general arguments for and against liberalism, laissez faire capitalism and capitalism apply, excepting those points (such as the justice system) where anarcho capitalism diverges from the classical liberal tradition.
Practical questions
Critics often assert that anarcho capitalism will degenerate into plutocracy or feudalism in practice. They argue that it is a rational economic decision for organizations with the ability to exert coercion (private police, security and military forces) to exploit groups with less power. In this kind of environment, piracy, military imperialism, and slavery can be very profitable. Taken to its logical extreme, this argument assumes that allowing such "security" organizations to exert coercive power will inevitably lead to their becoming a ''de facto'' state.
The anarcho capitalist would respond that in the absence of what they call "victim disarmament" (gun control), such domination would be expensive even for the most powerful, who would instead prefer peaceful trade with all. Skeptics often feel that anarcho capitalists rely on "market solutions" to the point of ridiculousness.refChisari, Michael "Anarchy List" 5 October 1999 ref
Minarchist and statist critics often argue that the free rider problem makes anarcho capitalism (and, by extension, any anti statist political system) fundamentally unworkable in modern societies. They typically argue that there are some vital goods or services such as civil or military defense, management of common environmental resources, or the provision of public goods such as roads or lighthouses that cannot be effectively delivered without the backing of a government exercising effective territorial control, and so that abolishing the state as anarcho capitalists demand will either lead to catastrophe or to the eventual re establishment of monopoly governments as a necessary means to solving the coordination problems that the abolition of the state created. One counterargument by free market economists, such as Alex Tabarrok, emphasizes the private use of dominant assurance contracts. Some anarcho capitalists also contend that the "problem" of "public goods" is illusory and its invocation merely misunderstands the potential individual production of such goods. Others, such as David Friedman, point out that problems of market failure are the exception in private markets but the norm in the that control state action.
Robert Nozick argued in ''Anarchy, State and Utopia'' that anarcho capitalism would inevitably transform into a minarchist state, even without violating any of its own nonaggression principles, through the eventual emergence of a single locally dominant private defense and judicial agency that it is in everyone's interests to align with, because other agencies are unable to effectively compete against the advantages of the agency with majority coverage. Therefore, he felt that, even to the extent that the anarcho capitalist theory is correct, it results in an unstable system that would not endure in the real world.
Moral questions
Anarcho capitalists consider a choice or action to be "voluntary", in a moral sense, so long as that choice or action is not influenced by coercion or fraud perpetrated by another individual. They also believe that maintaining private property claims is always defensive so long as that property was obtained in a way they believe to be legitimate. Thus, so long as an employee and employer agree to terms, employment is regarded as voluntary regardless of the circumstances of property restriction surrounding it. Some critics say this ignores constraints on action due to both human and nonhuman factors, such as the need for food and shelter, and active restriction of both used and unused resources by those enforcing property claims. Thus, if a person requires employment in order to feed and house himself, it is said that the employer employee relationship cannot be voluntary, because the employer restricts the use of resources from the employee in such a way that he cannot meet his needs. This is essentially a semantic argument over the term "voluntary". Anarcho capitalists simply do not use the term in that latter sense in their philosophy, believing that sense to be morally irrelevant. Other critics argue that employment is involuntary because the distributions of wealth that make it necessary for some individuals to serve others by way of contract are supported by the enforcement of coercive private property systems. This is a deeper argument relating to distributive justice. Some of these critics appeal to an end state theory of justice, while anarcho capitalists (and propertarians in general) appeal to an entitlement theory. Other critics regard private property itself to either be an aggressive institution or a potentially aggressive one, rather than necessarily a defensive one, and thus reject claims that relationships based on unequal private property relations could be "voluntary".
Critics also point out that anarcho capitalist ethics do not entail any positive moral obligation to help others in need (see ''altruism'', the ethical doctrine). Like other right libertarians, anarcho capitalists may argue that no such moral obligation exists or argue that if a moral obligation to help others does exist that there is an overarching moral obligation to refrain from initiating coercion on individuals to enforce it. Anarcho capitalists believe that helping others should be a matter of free personal choice, and do not recognize any form of social obligation arising from an individual's presence in a society. They, like all right libertarians, believe in a distinction between negative and positive rights in which negative rights should be recognized as being legitimate, and positive rights rejected. Critics often dismiss this stance as being unethical or selfish, or reject the legitimacy of the distinction between positive and negative rights. (Critics thereby redefine selfish to not include forcing other people to do what you want and disregarding the wishes of others.)
Property ownership rights and their extent are a source of contention among different philosophies. Most see the rights as less absolute than anarcho capitalists do. The main issues are what kinds of things are valid property, and what constitutes abandonment of property. The first is contentious even among anarcho capitalists: there is disagreement over the validity of intellectual propertyrefMcElroy, Wendy (1995) Libertarian Heritage No. 14 ISBN 1856372812 Retrieved 24 June 2005 ref intangible goods that are not economically scarce. Some supporters of private property but critics of anarcho capitalism may question whether unused land is valid property (Agorism, Georgism, geolibertarianism, individualist anarchism). The second issue is a common objection among socialists who do not believe in absentee ownership. Anarcho capitalists have strong abandonment criteria one maintains ownership (more or less) until one agrees to trade or gift it. The critics of this view tend to have weaker abandonment criteria for example, one loses ownership (more or less) when one stops personally using it. Also, the idea of original appropriation is anathema to most types of socialism, as well as any philosophy that takes common ownership of land and natural resources as a premise. There are also philosophies that view any ownership claims on land and natural resources as immoral and illegitimate, thus rejecting anarcho capitalism as a philosophy that takes private ownership of land as a premise.
Utilitarian critics simply argue that anarcho capitalism does not maximize utility, contending that it would fall far short of that goal. This kind of criticism comes from a variety of different political views and ideologies, and different critics have different views on which other system does or would do a better job of bringing the greatest benefits to the greatest number of people. Anarcho capitalists consider the nonaggression axiom to be a "side constraint" on civilized human actionref name Nozick 1973 , or a necessary condition for human society to be beneficial (Herbert Spencer, Murray Rothbard), and thus should not be used as a trade off for vague utilitarian values. Another response, implied by Austrian economics, is to argue that personal utility is not an additive quantity, therefore concluding that all utilitarian arguments, which invariably rely on aggregation of personal utilities, are logically and mathematically invalid.
Anarcho capitalist literature
Nonfiction
The following is a partial list of notable nonfiction works discussing anarcho capitalism.
Murray Rothbard Father of modern anarcho capitalism:
'''' The ultimate Austrian economics book,
'''' Classification of State economic interventions,
'''' Moral justification of a free society
Frederic Bastiat, '''' Radical classical liberalism
Davidson Rees Mogg, ''The Sovereign Individual'' Historians look at technology implications
David Friedman, ''The Machinery of Freedom'' Classic utilitarian defense of anarchism
Auberon Herbert, ''''
Albert Jay Nock, '''' Oppenheimer's thesis applied to early US history
Juan Lutero Madrigal, ''''
Franz Oppenheimer, '''' Analysis of State political means vs. economic means
Robert Nozick, ''Anarchy, State, and Utopia'' Academic philosopher on libertarianism
Herbert Spencer, '''' Includes the essay "The Right to Ignore the State"
Morris Linda Tannahill, ''The Market for Liberty'' Classic on PDAs (private defense agencies)
Fiction
Anarcho capitalism has been examined in certain works of literature, particularly science fiction. an example being Robert A. Heinlein's 1966 novel ''The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress'', where he explores what he terms "rational anarchism."
Notes
div style "font size: 85 "
references
div
References
Benson, Bruce: ''The Enterprise of Law: Justice Without The State''
Hart, David M.: Retrieved 14 September 2005
Hoppe, Hans Hermann: ''A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism''
Hoppe, Hans Hermann: ''Democracy: The God That Failed''
Rothbard, Murray: ''For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto''
Rothbard, Murray: ''The Ethics of Liberty''
Spooner, Lysander: (1867) Retrieved 19 May 2005
Tannehill, Linda and Morris: ''The Market For Liberty''
Tucker, Benjamin: (1888) Liberty 5.16, no. 120 (10 March 1888), pp. 2 3.Retrieved 20 May 2005
Tucker, Benjamin: (1926) Retrieved 20 May 2005
Van Notten, Michael: , 2005
See also
Books
Murray Rothbard Father of modern anarcho capitalism:
'''' The ultimate Austrian economics book,
'''' Classification of State economic interventions,
'''' Moral justification of a free society
Frederic Bastiat, '''' Radical classical liberalism
Davidson Rees Mogg, ''The Sovereign Individual'' Historians look at technology implications
David Friedman, ''The Machinery of Freedom'' Classic utilitarian defense of anarchism
Auberon Herbert, ''''
Albert Jay Nock, '''' Oppenheimer's thesis applied to early US history
Juan Lutero Madrigal, ''''
Franz Oppenheimer, '''' Analysis of State political means vs. economic means
Robert Nozick, ''Anarchy, State, and Utopia'' Academic philosopher on libertarianism
Herbert Spencer, '''' Includes the essay "The Right to Ignore the State"
Morris Linda Tannahill, ''The Market for Liberty'' Classic on PDAs (private defense agencies)
Related subjects
Anarcho capitalist literature
Anarcho capitalist terminology and symbolism
Classical liberalism
Digital gold bug
Crypto anarchism
Free market
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Market liberalism
Polycentric law
Private currency
General
Anarchism
Anarchist law
Libertatia
Statism
External links
Anarcho capitalist websites
from anarchism.net
comes with an ancap start up, articles and links
, has one of the more active forums and infrequent theoretical and practical articles, and hosts by Gene Callahan
, a renowned French anarcho capitalist economist
is a resource promoting anarcho capitalism through essays, humour, quotes, links and more.
Bryan Caplan's is written from the perspective of an anarcho capitalist.
is a widely read paleolibertarian news site, it also hosts by Stephan Kinsella and by Walter Block
(pdf), an article on the congruence of Jesus's biblical teachings and anarcho capitalism
and by Murray N. Rothbard
, another way of considering things that is considered by some ultimately equivalent to anarcho capitalism.
, an anarcho capitalist site
from the viewpoint of an anarcho capitalist
is a group blog by "...a varied group that includes wild eyed anarcho capitalists"
and at Sovereignlife.com
is an anarcho capitalist news site with an atheistic slant.
Argues that the Christian Bible supports anarcho capitalism
Lifestyle guide for Anarcho capitalists
"The home of the Anti Government Pro Enterprise Movement of India"
Criticisms
"An Anarchist FAQ" from Infoshop.org
Retrieved 20 May 2005
a collection of links to anti anarcho capitalist resources.
Jeff Draughn's is a contemporary left anarchist critique of anarcho capitalism
contains critiques of both libertarianism and anarcho capitalism.
by Ian MacSaorsa
in which he discusses anarcho capitalism
from Chapter 36 of "Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism" by Peter Marshall
Criticisms by other radical capitalists
Robert J. Binidotto's
Paul Birch's and
Tony Hollick's
Capitalism.org's
by Leonard Peikoff, Ayn Rand's intellecutal heir, concerning anarchism
by Drieu Godefridi (Hayek Institute)
Other
, by Stefan Molyneux
, by Stefan Molyneux
Something resembling rudimentary anarcho capitalism is developing organically in Somalia
Somali telecommunications infrastructure without government.
Forum and news source for discussion of real world approximation of anarcho capitalism now functioning in Somalia
Anarcho capitalism in the old "Wild West" in the U.S.
19th Century Individualist Anarchists influence on Anarcho Capitalism
from ''The Conquest of Power'', by Albert Weisbord
(animated)
, by
: a solution to complete anarcho capitalism with effective solutions to the public good problem and to practical implementation it is planned to be implemented by software on the web.
Peter Sabatini's
by Richard A. Gardner
by Guglielmo Piombini
by Roberta Modugno Crocetta
Anarcho capitalist pod casts
, by Stefan Molyneux
Anarcho capitalist blogs
Category:Anarchism
Category:Libertarianism
Category:Political movements
Category:Political theories
Category:Economic ideologies
ca:Anarcocapitalisme
da:Anarko kapitalisme
de:Anarchokapitalismus
et:Anarhokapitalism
es:Anarco capitalismo
eo:Anarki kapitalismo
fr:Anarcho capitalisme
ko:
io:Anarkio kapitalismo
it:Anarco capitalismo
nl:Anarcho kapitalisme
pl:Anarchokapitalizm
pt:Anarco capitalismo
fi:Anarkokapitalismi
sv:Anarkokapitalism
zh:
REDIRECT anarcho capitalism
style "float:right "
'''August 9''' is the 221st day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar (222nd in leap years), with 144 days remaining.
Events
48 BC Roman Civil War: Battle of Pharsalus Julius Caesar decisively defeats Pompey at Pharsalus and Pompey flees to Egypt.
378 Battle of Adrianople: A large Roman army led by Emperor Valens is defeated by the Visigoths in present day Turkey. Valens is killed along with 2 3 of his army.
681 Bulgaria is founded as a Khanate on the south bank of the Danube, after defeating the Byzantine armies of Emperor Constantine IV south of the Danube delta.
1048 Pope Damasus II dies in Rome, after reigning for only 23 days.
1173 Construction of the (Leaning) Tower of Pisa begins, and it takes two centuries to complete.
1483 Opening of the Sistine Chapel
1842 Webster Ashburton Treaty is signed, establishing the United States Canada border east of the Rocky Mountains.
1862 American Civil War: Battle of Cedar Mountain At Cedar Mountain, Virginia, Confederate General Stonewall Jackson narrowly defeats Union forces under General John Pope.
1877 Indian Wars: Battle of Big Hole A small band of Nez Perc Indians clash with the United States Army.
1892 Thomas Edison receives a patent for a two way telegraph.
1902 Edward VII is crowned king of the United Kingdom.
1936 1936 Summer Olympics: Jesse Owens wins his fourth gold medal at the games becoming the first American to win four medals in one Olympics.
1942 Indian leader, Mohandas Gandhi is arrested in Bombay by British forces, launching the Quit India Movement.
1944 The United States Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising Council release posters featuring Smokey the Bear for the first time.
1945 World War II: An atomic bomb is dropped on the city of Nagasaki, Japan killing an estimated 70,000 90,000.
1965 Singapore seceded from the newly formed Federation of Malaysia.
1965 Space disasters: A fire at a Titan missile base near Little Rock, Arkansas kills 53 construction workers.
1967 Vietnam War: Operation Cochise initiated United States Marines begin a new operation in the Que Son Valley.
1969 Members of a cult led by Charles Manson murder five people.
1974 Richard Nixon becomes the first President of the United States to resign from office. His Vice President, Gerald Ford, becomes president.
1983 Peter Jennings hosts his first broadcast of ABC's World News Tonight as sole anchor.
1986 The Headington Shark is erected in Oxford.
1987 9 people are shot dead and 17 more injured as 19 year old Julian Knight opens fire at random in the Hoddle Street Massacre in Clifton Hill
1988 Wayne Gretzky is traded from the Edmonton Oilers to the Los Angeles Kings in one of the most controversial transactions in hockey history.
1989 Kaifu Toshiki becomes Prime Minister of Japan.
1993 The Liberal Democratic Party of Japan loses a 38 year hold on national leadership.
1993 King Albert II of Belgium is sworn into office.
1995 Netscape launches IPO.
1999 Russian President Boris Yeltsin fires his Prime Minister, Sergei Stepashin, and for the fourth time fires his entire cabinet.
1999 The Diet of Japan enacts a law establishing the Hinomaru and Kimi Ga Yo as the official national flag and national anthem.
2000 A Piper Navajo and a Piper Seminole collide in mid air over a housing development in Burlington, New Jersey, killing 11
2001 US President George W. Bush announces his support for federal funding of limited research on embryonic stem cells.
2001 In Jerusalem, 15 people die and 130 wounded in the Sbarro restaurant suicide bombing.
2005 Space Shuttle ''Discovery'' makes successful touchdown at Edwards Air Force Base, California
Births
1201 Arnold Fitz Thedmar, English chronicler (d. 1274)
1593 Izaak Walton, English angler (d. 1683)
1631 John Dryden, English Poet Laureate (d. 1700)
1648 Johann Michael Bach, German composer (d. 1694)
1653 John Oldham, English poet (d. 1683)
1674 Franti ek Maxmili n Ka ka, Czech architect (d. 1766)
1722 Augustus William, Prince of Prussia (d. 1758)
1726 Francesco Cetti, Italian Jesuit scientist (d. 1778)
1757 Thomas Telford, Scottish civil engineer (d. 1834)
1776 Amedeo Avogadro, Italian chemist (d. 1856)
1797 Charles Robert Malden, British naval officer (d. 1855)
1805 Joseph Locke, English railway and civil engineer (d. 1860)
1845 Brother Andre, Canadian religious figure (d. 1937)
1871 Leonid Andreyev, Russian writer (d. 1919)
1872 Joseph August, Archduke of Austria, Austrian field marshal (d. 1962)
1874 Reynaldo Hahn, Venezuelan composer and conductor (d. 1947)
1896 Jean Piaget, Swiss psychologist (d. 1980)
1896 Lev Vygotsky, Russian psychologist (d. 1934)
1896 Erich H ckel, German physicist (d. 1980)
1899 P. L. Travers, Australian author (d. 1996)
1902 Zino Francescatti, French violinist (d. 1991)
1909 Adam von Trott zu Solz, German diplomat opposing the Nazi regime (executed) (d. 1944)
1911 William Alfred Fowler, American physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1996)
1914 Tove Jansson, Finnish author (d. 2001)
1919 Joop den Uyl, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 1987)
1919 Ralph Houk, baseball player and manager
1921 J. James Exon, Nebraska Senator and Governor
1922 Philip Larkin, English poet (d. 1985)
1927 Daniel Keyes, American author
1927 Robert Shaw, English actor (d. 1978)
1928 Bob Cousy, American basketball player
1931 M rio Zagallo, Brazilian football coach and player
1933 Tetsuko Kuroyanagi, Japanese television personality and children's author
1938 Leonid Kuchma, Ukrainian politician
1938 Rod Laver, Australian tennis player
1939 Romano Prodi, Italian politician, President of the European Commission
1939 Brito, Brazilian football player
1944 Sam Elliott, American actor
1945 Ken Norton, American boxer
1945 Posy Simmonds, English cartoonist
1948 Bill Campbell, American baseball player
1949 Jonathan Kellerman, American writer
1952 Prateep Ungsongtham Hata, Thai politician
1953 Robert Cray, Blues musician
1957 Melanie Griffith, American actress
1959 Stuart Hughes, Canadian actor
1962 Kevin Mack, American football player
1963 Whitney Houston, American singer and actress
1964 Brett Hull, Canadian born hockey player
1967 Deion Sanders, American football player
1968 Gillian Anderson, American actress
1968 Eric Bana, Australian actor
1969 Troy Percival, baseball player
1972 Juanes, Colombian singer
1973 Kevin McKidd, Scottish actor
1973 Filippo Inzaghi, Italian footballer
1974 Matt Morris, baseball player
1976 Jessica Capshaw, American actress
1976 Rhona Mitra, English actress
1977 Chamique Holdsclaw, American basketball player
1977 Mikael Silvestre, French footballer
1978 Audrey Tautou, French actress
Deaths
117 Trajan, Roman Emperor (b. 53)
378 Valens, Roman Emperor (killed in battle) (b. 328)
803 Byzantine Empress Irene
1107 Emperor Horikawa of Japan (b. 1079)
1250 King Eric IV of Denmark (b. 1216)
1534 Cardinal Cajetan, Italian theologian (b. 1470)
1634 William Noy, English jurist (b. 1577)
1720 Simon Ockley, English orientalist (b. 1678)
1744 James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos, English patron of the arts (b. 1673)
1886 Samuel Ferguson, Northern Irish poet and artist (b. 1810)
1919 Ruggiero Leoncavallo, Italian composer (b. 1857)
1942 Edith Stein, (St. Teresa Benedicta of the Cross) (executed) (b. 1891)
1945 Harry Hillman, American athlete (b. 1881)
1962 Hermann Hesse, German born writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1877)
1967 Joe Orton, English writer (b. 1933)
1969 Abigail Folger, American heiress (b. 1943)
1969 Wojciech Frykowski, Polish writer (b. 1936)
1969 Cecil Frank Powell, British physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1903)
1969 Jay Sebring, American hair stylist (b. 1933)
1969 Sharon Tate, American actress (murdered) (b. 1943)
1975 Dmitri Shostakovich, Russian composer (b. 1906)
1995 Jerry Garcia, American guitarist (Grateful Dead) (b. 1942)
2000 John Harsanyi, Hungarian born economist, Bank of Sweden Prize winner (b. 1920)
2002 Peter Neville, anarchist, sociologist, and peace activist
2003 Ray Harford, English footballer and manager (b. 1945)
2003 Gregory Hines, American actor and dancer (b. 1946)
2005 Matthew McGrory, American actor (b. 1973)
2005 Judith Rossner, American novelist (b. 1935)
Holidays and observances
Feast day of Jean Vianney, Edith Stein and Saint Romanus Ostiarius in the Roman Catholic Church
Feast day of the great martyr Saint Panteleimon in Russian Orthodox Church
South Africa: National Women's Day
Singapore: National Day
India:Quit India Day
External links
August 8 August 10 July 9 September 9 listing of all days
af:9 Augustus
ar:9
an:9 d'agosto
ast:9 d'agostu
bg:9
be:9
bs:9. avgust
ca:9 d'agost
ceb:Agosto 9
cv: , 9
co:9 d'aostu
cs:9. srpen
cy:9 Awst
da:9. august
de:9. August
et:9. august
el:9
es:9 de agosto
eo:9 a de a gusto
eu:Abuztuaren 9
fo:9. august
fr:9 ao t
fy:9 augustus
ga:9 L nasa
gl:9 de agosto
ko:8 9
hr:9. kolovoza
io:9 di agosto
ilo:Agosto 9
id:9 Agustus
ia:9 de augusto
ie:9 august
is:9. g st
it:9 agosto
he:9
jv:9 Agustus
ka:9
csb:9 z lnika
ku:9' gelaw j
lt:Rugpj io 9
lb:9. August
li:9 augustus
hu:Augusztus 9
mk:9
ms:9 Ogos
nap:9 'e a sto
nl:9 augustus
ja:8 9
no:9. august
nn:9. august
oc:9 d'agost
pl:9 sierpnia
pt:9 de Agosto
ro:9 august
ru:9
se:Borgem nu 9.
sq:9 Gusht
scn:9 di austu
simple:August 9
sk:9. august
sl:9. avgust
sr:9.
fi:9. elokuuta
sv:9 augusti
tl:Agosto 9
tt:9. August
te: 9
th:9
vi:9 th ng 8
tr:9 A ustos
uk:9
wa:9 d' awousse
war:Agosto 9
zh:8 9
'''Aristophanes''' (c. 448 BC 380 BC Greek ) was a Greek comic dramatist.
The place and even exact date of his birth are unknown, but he was probably educated in Athens. He was from the Athenian deme of Kudathenaium. He is famous for writing comedies such as ''The Birds'' for the two Athenian festivals: the Dionysia and the Lenea. He wrote forty plays, eleven of which still survive, and his plays are the only surviving examples of Old Attic Comedy. Many of his plays were political, and often satirized the well known citizens of Athens and their conduct in the Peloponnesian War. He is known to have been prosecuted for Athenian law's equivalent of libel more than once. A famous comedy, ''The Frogs'', was given the unprecedented honor of a second performance. According to a later biographer, he was also awarded a civic crown for "The Frogs".
He appears in Plato's ''Symposium'', giving a humorous mythical account of the origin of Love. ''The Clouds,'' a disastrous production resulting in a humiliating and long remembered (cf. the revised parabasis of "The Clouds" and the parabasis of next year's "The Wasps") last place finish at the City Dionysia, satirizes the new, sophistic learning en vogue among the aristocracy at the time Socrates was the principal target and in the play he emerges as a typical Sophist, no matter how inaccurate the portrayal may be. ''Lysistrata'' was written during the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta and presents a pacifist theme in a comical manner: the women of the two states show off their bodies and deprive their husbands of sex until they stop fighting. This play was later illustrated at length by Pablo Picasso.
Surviving plays
''The Acharnians'' (425 BC)
''The Knights'' (424 BC)
''The Clouds'' (Original 423 BCUncompleted revised version survives 418 415 BC)
''The Wasps'' (422 BC)
''Peace'' (first version, 421 BC)
''The Birds'' (414 BC)
''Lysistrata'' (411 BC)
''Thesmophoriazusae'' ("The Festival Women", first version, ca.410 BC)
''The Frogs'' (405 BC)
''Ecclesiazousae'' ("The Assemblywomen", ca.392 BC)
''Plutus'' ("Wealth", second version, 388 BC)
Dated non surviving plays
''Banqueters'' (427 BC)
''Babylonians'' (426 BC)
''Farmers'' (424 BC)
''Merchant Ships'' (423 BC)
''The Clouds'' (first version) (423 BC)
''Proagon'' (422 BC)
''Amphiaraos'' (414 BC)
''Plutus'' ("Wealth", first version, 408 BC)
''Gerytades'' (uncertain, probably 407 BC)
''Koskalos'' (387 BC)
''Aiolosikon'' (second version, 386 BC)
Undated non surviving plays
''Aiolosikon'' (first version)
''Anagyros''
''Broilers''
''Daidalos''
''Danaids''
''Dionysos Shipwrecked''
''Centaur''
''Niobos''
''Heroes''
''Islands''
''Lemnian Women''
''Old Age''
''Peace'' (second version)
''Phoenician Women''
''Poetry''
''Polyidos''
''Seasons''
''Storks''
''Telemessians''
''Triphales''
''Thesmophoriazusae'' ("The Festival Women", second version)
''Women Encamping''
See also
Agathon
Greek literature
Asteroid 2934 Aristophanes, named after the dramatist
External links
Biography and texts of Aristophanes
Category:448 BC births
Category:380 BC deaths
Category:Ancient Greek dramatists and playwrights
Category:Ancient Athenians
Aristophanes
bg:
ca:Arist fanes
da:Aristofanes
de:Aristophanes
el:
es:Arist fanes
fr:Aristophane
ko:
it:Aristofane
he:
la:Aristophanes
hu:Arisztophan sz
nl:Aristophanes
ja:
nn:Aristofanes
no:Aristofanes
pl:Arystofanes
pt:Arist fanes
ru:
sk:Aristofanes
sl:Aristofan
sr:
fi:Aristofanes
sv:Aristofanes
tr:Aristofanes
uk:
zh:
! Image missing
'''Albert Schweitzer''', OM, (January 14, 1875 September 4, 1965) was a German theologian, musician, philosopher, and physician. He was born in Kaysersberg, Elsass Lothringen, Germany (now in Haut Rhin, Alsace, France). He received the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize in 1953.
Theology
As a young theologian his first major work, by which he gained a great reputation, was ''The Quest of the Historical Jesus'' (1906), in which he interpreted the life of Jesus in the light of Jesus' own eschatological convictions. He established his reputation further as a New Testament scholar by other theological studies, like ''The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle'' (1930). In these studies he examined the eschatological beliefs of Paul and through this the message of the New Testament.
During his tenure as a priest for St. Nicholas church in Strasbourg, he blessed the wedding of Theodor Heuss, who was to become the first President of Germany of the German Federal Republic.
Music
Albert Schweitzer was a famous organist in his day, and was highly interested in the music of Johann Sebastian Bach. He developed a simple style of performance, which he thought to be closer to what Bach had meant it to be. He based his interpretation mainly on his reassessment of Bach's religious intentions. Through the book "Johann Sebastian Bach", the final version of which he completed in 1908, he advocated this new style, which has had great influence in the way Bach's music is now being treated. Albert Schweitzer was also a famous organ constructor. Recordings of Schweitzer playing the music of Bach are available on CDs.
Philosophy
Schweitzer's worldview was based on his idea of ''Reverence for Life'', which he believed to be his greatest single contribution to humankind. His view was that Western civilization was in decay because of gradually abandoning its ethical foundations those of affirmation of life.
It was his firm conviction that the respect for life is the highest principle. In a similar kind of exaltation of life to that of Friedrich Nietzsche, a recently influential philosopher of the time, Schweitzer admittedly followed the same line as that of the Russian Leo Tolstoy. Some people in his days compared his philosophy with that of Francis of Assisi, a comparison he did not object to. In his ''Philosophy of Civilisation'' (all quotes in this section from Chapter 26 of the same book), he wrote:
blockquoteTrue philosophy must start from the most immediate and comprehensive fact of consciousness: 'I am life that wants to live, in the midst of life that wants to live'. blockquote
Life and love in his view are based on, and follow out of the same principle: respect for every manifestation of Life, and a personal, spiritual relationship towards the universe. Ethics, according to Schweitzer, consists in the ''compulsion'' to show to the will to live of each and every being the same reverence as one does to one's own. In circumstances where we apparently fail to satisfy this compulsion should not lead us to defeatism, since the will to live renews itself again and again, as an outcome of an evolutionary necessity and a phenomenon with a spiritual dimension.
However, as Schweitzer himself pointed out, it is neither impossible nor difficult to spend a life of not following it: the history of world philosophies and religions clearly shows many instances of denial of the principle of reverence for life. He points to the prevailing philosophy in the European middle ages, and the Indian Brahminic philosophy. Nevertheless, this kind of attitude lacks in genuineness.
Since we enter the world, it offers us a horrible drama: it consists in the fact that the will to live, looked as a sum of all the individual wills, is divided against itself. One existence is antagonised against another, one destroys another. Only in the thinking being has the will to live become conscious of other will to live, and desirious of solidarity with it. This solidarity, however, cannot be brought about, because human life does not escape the puzzling and horrible circumstance that it must live at the cost of other life. But as an ethical being one strives to escape whenever possible from this necessity, and to put a stop to this disunion of the Will to live, so far as it is within one's power.
Schweitzer advocated the concept of reverence for life widely throughout his entire life. The historical Enlightenment waned and corrupted itself, Schweitzer held, because it has not been well enough grounded in thought, but compulsively followed the ethical will to live. Hence, he looked forward to a renewed and more profound Rennaisance and Enlightenment of humanity (a view he expressed in the Epilogue of his ''Out of My Life and Thought''). Albert Schweitzer nourished hope in a humankind that is more profoundly aware of its position in the Universe. His optimism was based in "belief in truth". "The spirit generated by conceiving of truth is greater than the force of circumstances." He persistently emphasized the necessity to think, rather than merely acting on basis of passing impulses or by following the most widespread opinions.
blockquoteNever for a moment do we lay aside our mistrust of the ideals established by society, and of the convictions which are kept by it in circulation. We always know that society is full of folly and will deceive us in the matter of humanity. ... humanity meaning consideration for the existence and the happiness of individual human beings. blockquote
Respect for life, resulting from contemplation on one's own conscious will to live, leads the individual to live in the service of other people and of every living creature.
Schweitzer was very much respected for putting his theory into practice in his own life.
Schweitzer died in Gabon, Africa after years of serving others as a physician in Africa.
Stance on racial relations
Schweitzer considered his work as a medical missionary in Africa to be his response
to Jesus' call to become "fishers of men" but also as a small
recompense for the historic guilt of European colonizers: "Who can describe the injustice and cruelties that in the course of centuries they the coloured peoples have suffered at the hands of Europeans? . . . If a record could be compiled of all that has happened between the white and the coloured races, it would make a book containing numbers of pages which the reader would have to turn over unread because their contents would be too horrible." On the Edge of the Primeval Forest, p. 115 .
Schweitzer was sometimes accused of being paternalistic or colonialist in his attitude towards Africans. For instance, he thought Gabonese independence came too early, without adequate education or accommodation to local circumstances. Edgar Berman quotes Schweitzer speaking these lines in 1960: "No society can go from the primeval directly to an industrial state without losing the leavening that time and an agricultural period allow." In Africa With Schweitzer, p. 139 . Chinua Achebe has quoted Schweitzer as saying "The African is indeed my brother but my junior brother." sup sup, which Achebe criticized him for.
Medicine
Albert Schweitzer spent most of his life in Lambar n in what is now Gabon, Africa. After his medical studies in 1913, he went there with his wife to establish a hospital near an already existing mission post. He treated and operated on literally thousands of people. He took care of hundreds of Leprosy and treated many victims of the African sleeping sickness.
In 1914 World War I began and because he was a German on French territory, Schweitzer and his wife were taken captive and temporarily confined to their house. In 1917 they were interned in Garaison, France, and in 1918 in Saint Remy de Provence. There he studied and wrote as much as possible in preparation for among others his famous book ''Culture and Ethics'' (published in 1923). In July 1918 he was a free man again, and while working as a medical assistant and assistant pastor in Strasbourg, he was able to finish the book. In the meantime he began to speak and lecture about his ideas wherever he was invited. Not only did he want his philosophy on culture and ethics to become widely known, it also served as a means to raise money for the hospital in Lambar n , for which he had already emptied his own pockets.
In 1924 he returned to Lambar n , where he managed to rebuild the decayed hospital, after which he resumed his medical practices. Soon he was no longer the only medical doctor in the hospital, and whenever possible he went to Europe to lecture at universities. Gradually his opinions and concepts became acknowledged, not only in Europe, but worldwide.
Later life
From 1939 1948 he stayed in Lambar n , unable to go back to a Europe in war. Three years after the end of World War II, in 1948, he returned for the first time to Europe and kept travelling back and forth (and once to the USA) as long as he could until his death in 1965.
From 1952 until his death he worked against nuclear tests and nuclear weapons with Albert Einstein and Bertrand Russell . In 1957 and 1958 he broadcast four speeches over Radio Oslo which were published in ''Peace or Atomic War''. In 1957, Schweitzer was one of the founders of The Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy.
His life was portrayed in the 1952 movie ''Il est minuit, Docteur Schweitzer'', starring Pierre Fresnay as Albert Schweitzer and Jeanne Moreau as his nurse Marie. His cousin Anne Marie Schweitzer Sartre was the mother of Jean Paul Sartre.
He was chevalier of the Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.
He died on September 4, 1965 in Lambar n , Gabon.
Selected bibliography
''The Decay and the Restoration of Civilization'' (1923)
''Civilization and Ethics'' (1923)
''Indian Thought and Its Development'' (1935)
''The Kingdom of God and Primitive Christianity'' (publ.1967)
''My Life and Thought'' (1931) (autobiography. according to the preface of the reviewed edition: Henry Holt and Company, 1991, Schweitzer personally considered to be his most important book)
''Peace or Atomic War'' 1958
''Out of My Life and Thought: An Autobiography by Albert Schweitzer'' ISBN 0801860970
''The Quest Of The Historical Jesus A Critical Study Of Its Progress From Reimarus To Wrede''
Timeline
1893 Studied Philosophy and Theology at the Universities of Strassburg, Berlin and Paris
1900 Curate of the Church of St. Nicolas in Strassburg
1901 Principal of the Theological Seminary in Strassburg
1905 1913 Studied medicine and surgery
1912 Married Helene Bresslau
1913 Physician in Lambar n , Africa
1915 Developed his ethic ''Reverence for life''
1917 Interned in France
1918 Medical assistant and assistant pastor in Strassburg
1919 First major speech about ''Reverence for life'' at the University of Uppsala, Sweden
1919 Birth of daughter, Rhena
1924 Return to Lambar n as physician frequent visits to Europe for speaking engagements
1939 1948 Lambar n
1949 Visit to the USA
1948 1965 Lambar n and Europe.
1953 Nobel Peace Prize for the year 1952
1957 1958 Four speeches against nuclear armament and tests
See also
Christian Eschatology
References and external links
''Albert Schweitzer: a Biography'' by James Brabazon the definitive biography
information on Albert Schweitzer's life and thought
a charity promoting Reverence for Life
Persondata
NAME Schweitzer, Albert
ALTERNATIVE NAMES
SHORT DESCRIPTION German theologian, musician, philosopher, and physician
DATE OF BIRTH January 14 1875
PLACE OF BIRTH Kaysersberg, Elsass Lothringen, Germany (now in Haut Rhin, Alsace, France)
DATE OF DEATH September 4 1965
PLACE OF DEATH Lambar n , Gabon
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Category:Humanitarians
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
Schweitzer, Albert
cs:Albert Schweitzer
da:Albert Schweitzer
de:Albert Schweitzer
eo:Albert SCHWEITZER
es:Albert Schweitzer
fi:Albert Schweitzer
fr:Albert Schweitzer
he:
hr:Albert Schweitzer
hu:Albert Schweitzer
it:Albert Schweitzer
ja:
nl:Albert Schweitzer
nn:Albert Schweitzer
no:Albert Schweitzer
pl:Albert Schweitzer
pt:Albert Schweitzer
ru: ,
sk:Albert Schweitzer
sl:Albert Schweitzer
sv:Albert Schweitzer
uk:
The '''Austrian School''' is a school of economic thought that rejects opposing economists' reliance on methods used in natural science for the study of human action, and instead bases its formalism of economics on relationships through logic or introspection called "praxeology".
Its most famous adherents are Carl Menger, Eugen von B hm Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, Ludwig von Mises, Friedrich Hayek, Murray Rothbard, Israel Kirzner and Hans Hermann Hoppe. While often controversial, and standing to some extent outside of the mainstream of neoclassical theory as well as being staunchly against much of Keynes' theory and its results the Austrian School has been widely influential because of its emphasis on the creative phase of economic productivity and their questioning of the basis of the behavioral theory underlying neoclassical economics.
The Austrian School is generally associated with groups that label themselves classical liberals or libertarian in their ideas of social, political and economic organization.
History
Classical economics focused on the exchange theory of value. In late 19th century, however, there was a focus on the concept of the "marginal" cost and value. (See Marginalism). Carl Menger's 1871 book, ''Principles of Economics,'' is considered one of the crucial works that began the period known as neoclassical economics. While marginalism was generally influential, there was also a more specific school that grew up around Menger, which came to be known as the "Vienna School" or "Austrian School". Austrian economics is currently closely associated with advocacy of radical ''laissez faire'' views. However, earlier Austrian economists were more cautious compared to later economists such as Ludwig von Mises, with Eugen von B hm Bawerk saying that he feared that unbridled free competition would lead to "anarchism in production and consumption." However, the Austrian School, especially through the works of Friedrich Hayek, would be influential in the revival of laissez faire thought in the 1980s.
The school originated in Vienna and owes its name to members of the Historical School of economics who during the ''Methodenstreit,'' where the Austrians defended the reliance that classical economists placed on logic over observation. Their Prussian opponents derisively named them the "Austrian School" to emphasize a departure from mainstream German thought and to suggest a provincial approach.
Menger's contributions were closely followed by Eugen von B hm Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. Austrian economists developed a sense of themselves as a school distinct from neoclassical economics during the economic calculation debate, with Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek representing the Austrian position, where they contended that without monetary prices or private property, meaningful economic calculation was impossible. The Austrian economists were the first liberal economists to systematically challenge the Marxist school. This was partly a reaction to the ''Methodenstreit'' when they attacked the Hegelian doctrines of the Historical School. Though many Marxist authors have attempted to portray the Austrian school as a ''bourgeois'' reaction to Marx, such an interpretation is untenable: Menger wrote his ''Principles of Economics'' at almost the same time as Marx was completing ''Das Kapital.'' The Austrian economists were, however, the first to clash directly with Marxism, since both dealt with such subjects as money, capital, business cycles, and economic processes. B hm Bawerk wrote extensive critiques of Marx in the 1880s and 1890s, and several prominent Marxists including Rudolf Hilferding attended his seminar in 190506. In contrast, the classical economists had shown little interest in such topics, and many of them did not even gain familiarity with Marx's ideas until well into the twentieth century.
The school was no longer centered in Austria after Hitler came to power. Austrian economics was ill thought of by most economists after World War II due to its rejection of observational methods. Its reputation has lately risen with work by students of Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann, as well as an interest in Hayek after he won the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. However, it remains a distinctly minority position, even in such areas as capital value.
Austrian economics can be broken into two general trends. One, exemplified by Hayek, while distrusting of many neoclassical concepts, generally accepts their formulations, the other exemplified by the Ludwig von Mises Institute, seeks a different formalism for economics. The primary areas of contention between neoclassical theory and the Austrian school are on the possibility of consumer indifference neoclassical theory says it is possible, where as Mises rejected it as being "impossible to observe in practice" and when Mises and his students argued that utility functions are ordinal, and not cardinal that is, one can only rank preferences and not measure their intensity. Finally there are a host of questions about uncertainty raised by Mises and other Austrians, who argue for a different means of risk assessment.
An area that is often overlooked is the influence that Austrian school ideas have had on Keynesian macroeconomics. The source of this influence is the period of time where the London School of Economics brought in Hayek and other "continental" economists. While their students "flew the coop", refusing to join the Austrian school, many of the concepts, particularly relating time to the value of capital and its importance, would find their way into the work of Keynesians such as John Hicks. Alan Greenspan, speaking of the originators of the School, said in 2000, "the Austrian school have reached far into the future from when most of them practiced and have had a profound and, in my judgment, probably an irreversible effect on how most mainstream economists think in this country." The long time U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman said he attended a seminar hosted by Ludwig von Mises.
Analytical framework
Austrian economists reject observation as a tool applicable to economics, saying that while it is appropriate in the natural sciences where factors can be isolated in laboratory conditions, acting human beings are too complex for this treatment. Instead one should isolate the logical processes of human action a discipline named "praxeology" by Ludwig von Mises.
Austrians view entrepreneurship as the driving force in economic development, see private property as essential to the efficient use of resources, and often see government interference in market processes as counterproductive.
As with neoclassical economists, Austrians reject classical cost of production theories, most famously the labor theory of value. Instead they explain value by reference to the subjective preferences of individuals. This psychological aspect to Menger's economics has been attributed to the school's birth in turn of the century Vienna. Supply and demand are explained by aggregating over the decisions of individuals, following the precepts of methodological individualism, which asserts that only individuals and not collectives make decisions, and marginalist arguments, which compare the costs and benefits for incremental changes.
Contemporary neo Austrian economists claim to adopt economic subjectivism more consistently than any other school of economics and reject many neoclassical formalisms. For example, while neoclassical economics formalizes the economy as an equilibrium system with supply and demand in balance, Austrian economists emphasize its dynamic, perpetually dis equilibrated nature.
The core of the Austrian framework can be summarized as taking a subjectivist approach to marginal economics, and a focus on the idea that theory should absolutely overrule observation. Austrians focus completely on the opportunity cost of goods, as opposed to balancing downside or disutility costs. It is an Austrian assertion that everyone is ''better'' off in a mutually voluntary exchange, or they would not have carried it out. A fuller explanation of this in more exact terms is .
This focus on opportunity cost alone means that their interpretation of the time value of a good has a strict relationship: since goods will be as restricted by scarcity at a later point in time as they are now, the strict relationship between investment and time must also hold. A factory making goods next year is worth as much less as the goods it is making next year are worth. This means that the business cycle is driven by miscoordination between sectors of the same economy, caused by money not carrying incentive information correct about present choices, rather than within a single economy where money causes people to make bad decisions about how to spend their time. This means, in the Austrian context, the correct way to prevent imbalances in the economy is to make people want to buy the correct goods, rather than controlling when people buy goods.
Contributions
Some contributions of Austrian economists:
A theory of distribution in which factor prices result from the imputation of prices of consumer goods to goods of "higher order", that is goods used in the production of consumer goods (goods of the first order).
An emphasis on opportunity cost and reservation demand in defining value, and a refusal to consider supply as an otherwise independent cause of value. (The British economist Philip Wicksteed adopted this perspective.)
An emphasis on the forward looking nature of choice, seeing time as the root of uncertainty within economics (see also time preference).
A fundamental rejection of mathematical methods in economics seeing the function of economics as investigating the essences rather than the specific quantities of economic phenomena. This was seen as an evolutionary, or "genetic causal", approach against the stresses of equilibrium and perfect competition found in mainstream Neoclassical economics (see also praxeology).
Eugen von B hm Bawerk's critique of Marx centered around the untenability of the labor theory of value in the light of the transformation problem. There was also the connected argument that capitalists do not exploit workers they accommodate workers by providing them with income well in advance of the revenue from the output they helped to produce.
Eugen von B hm Bawerk's capital theory, which equates capital intensity with the degree of roundaboutness of production processes.
The Mises Hayek business cycle theory, which explains depression as a reaction to an intertemporal production structure fostered by monetary policy setting interest rates inconsistent with individual time preferences.
Hayek's concept of intertemporal equilibrium. (John Hicks took over this theory in his discussion of temporary equilibrium in ''Value and Capital,'' a book very influential on the development of neoclassical economics after World War II.)
Mises and Hayek's view of prices as permitting agents to make use of dispersed tacit knowledge.
The time preference theory of interest, which explains interest rates through intertemporal choice the different time preferences of the borrower or lender rather than as a price paid for a factor of production.
Stressing uncertainty in the making of economic decisions, rather than relying on "Homo economicus" or the rational man who was fully informed of all circumstances impinging on his decisions. The fact that perfect knowledge never exists, means that all economic activity implies risk.
Seeing the entrepreneurs' role as collecting and evaluating information and acting on risks.
The economic calculation debate between Austrian and Marxist economists, with the Austrians claiming that Marxism is flawed because prices could not be set to recognize opportunity costs of factors of production, and so socialism could not calculate best uses in the same way capitalism does.
Major Austrian economists
valign "top"
Benjamin Anderson
G rard Bramoull
Walter Block
Peter Boettke
'''Eugen von B hm Bawerk'''
Gene Callahan
Tony Carilli
Jean Pierre Centi
Christopher Coyne
Thomas DiLorenzo
Richard Ebeling
Frank Fetter
Jacques Garello
hspace width "40px"
valign "top"
Roger Garrison
David Gordon
'''Friedrich Hayek'''
Henry Hazlitt
Gottfried von Haberler
'''Hans Hermann Hoppe'''
Steven Horwitz
J rg Guido H lsmann
William Harold Hutt
Israel Kirzner
Ludwig Lachmann
Don Lavoie
Peter T. Leeson
Henri Lepage
hspace width "40px"
valign "top"
Peter Lewin
Roderick Long
Juan De Mariana
'''Ludwig von Mises'''
Margit von Mises
Luis de Molina
Oskar Morgenstern
Fritz Machlup
'''Carl Menger'''
Gerald O'Driscoll
Ernest C. Pasour
Ralph Raico
hspace width "40px"
valign "top"
George Reisman
Mario Rizzo
Llewellyn Rockwell
'''Murray Rothbard'''
Mark Thornton
Joseph Salerno
Pascal Salin
Josef S ma
Jesus Huerta de Soto
Richard von Strigl
Phillip Wicksteed
Friedrich von Wieser
Other related economists
Richard Cantillon
Frederic Bastiat (precursor)
Henry Hazlitt (introduced the Austrian School to the USA)
School of Salamanca (Renaissance precursors)
tienne Bonnot de Condillac
Louis Say
Jean Baptiste Say
L on Walras
Jules Dupuit
Lionel Robbins
Wilhelm R pke
Joseph Schumpeter
A.R.J. Turgot
Critics
Bryan Caplan
Seminal works
''Principles of Economics'' by Carl Menger
''Capital and Interest'' by Eugen von B hm Bawerk
''The Theory of Money and Credit'' by Ludwig von Mises
''Socialism'' by Ludwig von Mises
''Human Action'' by Ludwig von Mises
''Man, Economy, and State'' by Murray N. Rothbard
''Individualism and Economic Order'' by Friedrich Hayek
See also
Chicago school (economics)
Classical liberalism
Keynesian school
Neoclassical school
Socialist school
Supply side economics
School of Salamanca (Renaissance pre Austrians)
External links
Austrian School as defined by the Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Largest professional organization of Austrian economists
compare Austrian versus other Schools
by Houmanidis and Leen
Discussion about the Austrian school and libertarianism by economics students and professors
Directory of links from the Open Source Directory
Discussion message board concerning Austrian economic theory
Pascal Salin (in French)
Jacques Garello (in French)
Jean Pierre Centi (in French)
G rard Bramoull (in French)
Henri Lepage (in French)
Category:Economic theories
Category:Macroeconomics
cs:Rakousk kola
da:Den strigske skole
de: sterreichische Schule
et:Austria koolkond
es:Escuela Austr aca de Econom a
eo:A stria skolo de ekonomiko
fr: cole autrichienne d conomie
he:
is:Austurr sku hagfr ingarnir
nl:Oostenrijkse School
ja:
pt:Escola austr aca
sk:Rak ska kola
fi:It valtalainen taloustiede
An '''abscess''' is a collection of pus collected in a cavity formed by the tissue on the basis of an infectious process (usually caused by bacteria or parasites) or other foreign materials (e.g. splinters or bullet wounds). It is a defensive reaction of the tissue to prevent the spread of infectious materials to other parts of the body.
The organisms or foreign materials that gain access to a part of tissue kill the local cells, release toxins and trigger an inflammatory response by drawing huge amounts of white blood cells to the area and increasing the regional blood flow. So, pus is a collection of local dead tissue cells, white blood cells, infecting organisms or foreign material and toxins released by both organisms and blood cells. The final structure of the abscess is an abscess wall that is formed by the adjacent healthy cells in an attempt to build a barrier around the pus that limits the infected material from neighbouring structures.
Manifestations
The cardinal symptoms and signs of any kind of inflammatory process are redness, heat, swelling and pain. Abscesses may occur in any kind of solid tissue but most frequently on skin surface (where they may be superficial pustules (boils) or deep skin abscesses), in the lungs, brain, kidneys and tonsils. Major complications are spreading of the abscess material to adjacent or remote tissues and extensive regional tissue death (gangrene). Abscesses in most parts of the body rarely heal themselves, so prompt medical attention is indicated at the first suspicion of an abscess.
Treatment
The abscess should be inspected to identify if foreign objects are a cause, requiring surgical removal. Surgical drainage of the abscess (e.g. lancing) is usually indicated once the abscess has developed from a harder serous inflammation to a softer pus stage. As ''Staphylococcus aureus'' bacteria is a common cause, an anti Staphylococcus antibiotic such as Flucloxacillin or dicloxacillin is used . It is important to note that antibiotic therapy alone without surgical drainage of the abscess is seldom effective. In critical areas where surgery presents a high risk (such as the brain), surgery may be delayed or used as a last resort. The drainage of the lung abscess may be performed by positioning the patient in a way that enables the contents to be discharged via the respiratory tract. Warm compresses and elevation of the limb may be beneficial for skin abscess.
Perianal abscess
Perianal abscesses can be seen in patients with for example inflammatory bowel disease (such as Crohn's disease) or diabetes. Often the abscess will start as an internal wound caused by ulceration or hard stool. This wound typically becomes infected as a result of the normal presence of feces in the rectal area, and then develops into an abscess. This often presents itself as a lump of tissue near the anus which grows larger and more painful with the passage of time.
Like other abscesses, perianal abscesses may require prompt medical treatment, such as an incision and debridement or lancing.
See also
Boil
Sterile abscess
Category:Infectious diseases
de:Abszess
es:Absceso
fr:Pustule
it:Ascesso
ms:Bisul
nl:Abces
tl:Abseso
External links
The '''''Abwehr''''' was a German intelligence organization from 1921 to 1944. The verb ''abwehren'' means "to ward off", implying counterespionage this term was used as a concession to Allied demands that Germany's post World War I intelligence activities be for "defensive" purposes only. After February 4, 1938, its name in full was '''''Amt Ausland Abwehr im Oberkommando der Wehrmacht''''' (Foreign Bureau Defence of the Armed Forces High Command).
Despite its name, the purpose of the Abwehr was to obtain military intelligence concerning nations of interest to the German government. Its headquarters were located at 76 78 Tirpitzufer in Berlin, adjacent to the offices of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW).
The Abwehr before Canaris
The Abwehr was created in 1921 as part of the Ministry of Defence when Germany was allowed to form the Reichswehr, the military organization of the Weimar Republic. The first head was Major Friedrich Gempp, a former deputy to Col. Walther Nicolai, the head of German inteligence during World War I. At that time it was composed of only three officers and seven former officers plus a clerical staff. By the 1920s it was organized into three sections:
I. Reconnaissance
II. Cipher and Radio Monitoring
III. Counterespionage
The German Navy's intelligence staff merged with the Abwehr in 1928.
In the 1930s, with the rise of the Nazi movement, the Ministry of Defence was reorganized surprisingly, on June 7, 1932, a naval officer, Capt. Konrad Patzig, was named chief of the Abwehr, despite the fact that it was staffed largely by Army officers. But perhaps not surprisingly, due to the small size of the organization and its limited importance at that time, it was unsuitable for a more ambitious Army officer. Another possible factor was that naval officers had more foreign experience than their Army counterparts and understood more of foreign affairs. However, all three services eventually developed their own intelligence staff.
Because of Abwehr sponsored reconnaissance flights across the border with Poland, Patzig soon had confrontations with Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS. Army leaders feared that the flights would endanger the secret plans for an attack on Poland. Patzig was fired in January 1935 as a result, and was sent to command the new pocket battleship ''Admiral Graf Spee'' he later became Chief of Naval Personnel. His replacement was another Reichsmarine captain, Wilhelm Canaris.
The Abwehr under Canaris
Before the War
Before he took over the Abwehr on January 1, the soon to be Admiral Canaris was warned by Patzig of attempts by Himmler and Reinhard Heydrich to take over all German intelligence organs. Canaris, a master of backroom dealings which were so much a part of life, thought he knew how to deal with them. But even while he tried to maintain an at least cordial relationship with them, the antagonism between the Abwehr and the SS did not stop with Canaris at the helm.
It came to a head in 1937 when Adolf Hitler decided to help Josef Stalin in the latter's purge against the Soviet military. Hitler ordered that the German Army staff should be kept in the dark about Stalin's intentions, for fear that they would warn their Soviet counterparts. Accordingly, special SS teams, accompanied by burglary experts from the criminal police, broke into the secret files of the General Staff and the Abwehr and removed documents related to German Soviet collaboration. To conceal the thefts, fires were started at the break ins, which included Abwehr headquarters.
When Hitler replaced the Ministry of War with the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), the Abwehr became its intelligence agency, although with some degree of independence therefrom. Canaris reorganized the agency in 1938, establishing the following major departments, which existed until its dissolution:
I. Espionage
'''G''' false documents
'''H West''' army west (Anglo American intelligence)
'''H Ost''' army east (Soviet intelligence)
'''Ht''' army technical
'''i''' communications
'''L''' airforce
'''M''' naval
'''T Lw''' technical air force
'''W''' economics
II. Sabotage and special tasks
III. Counterespionage
Both Army and Navy officers headed these sections.
In this reorganizaton, Canaris took care to surround himself with a hand picked staff, notably his second in command, Hans Oster and Erwin von Lahousen, Section II Chief. All but one were not members of the Nazi party. The exception was Rudolf Bamler, who was appointed as chief of Section III to cement Himmler's trust in him, but Canaris made sure to keep a tight leash on him and gave him limited access to operational information.
The Abwehr During World War II
Under Canaris the Abwehr expanded and proved relatively efficient during the early years of the war. Its most notable success was Operation Nordpol, which was an operation against the Dutch underground network, which at the time was supported by the British Special Operations Executive. In March 1941, the Germans forced a captured SOE radio operator to transmit messages to Britain in a code that the Germans had obtained. Even though the operator gave every indication that he was compromised, the receiver in Britain did not notice this. Thus the Germans had been able to penetrate the Dutch operation and maintained this state of affairs for two years, capturing agents that were sent and sending false intelligence and sabotage reports until the British caught on.
But it was ineffective overall for several reasons. Much of its intelligence was deemed politically unacceptable to the German leadership. Moreover, it was in direct competition conflict with SS intelligence activities under Reinhard Heydrich and Walter Schellenberg. The animosity between the SS and Abwehr did not stop there. Many of the Abwehr's operatives including Canaris himself were in fact anti Nazi and were involved in many assassination attempts against Hitler, including the most serious one on July 20, 1944. Canaris even employed Jews in the Abwehr and used the agency to help a small number of Jews to escape from Germany into Switzerland. But perhaps the biggest reason was that Canaris himself sought to undermine the Nazi cause.
Despite the Abwehr's many intelligence coups, its effectiveness was more than negated by agents who with Canaris's blessing aided the Allies in whatever covert means were necessary. He personally gave false information which discouraged Hitler from invading Switzerland. He also persuaded Francisco Franco not to allow German forces to pass through Spain to invade Gibraltar. He even provided intelligence to the Allies on German intentions as well.
The SS continually undermined the Abwehr by putting several Abwehr officers under investigation, believing them (correctly) to be involved in anti Hitler plots. The SS also accused Canaris of being defeatist in his intelligence assessments, especially on the Russian campaign. One such briefing reportedly resulting in Hitler seizing Canaris by the lapels, and demanding to know whether the intelligence chief was insinuating that Germany would lose the war.
The Frau Solf Tea Party and the End of the Abwehr
The incident which eventually resulted in the dissolution of the Abwehr came to be known as the "Frau Solf Tea Party", which took place on September 10, 1943.
Frau Johanna (or Hanna) Solf, the widow of Dr. Wilhelm Solf, a former Colonial Minister under Kaiser Wilhelm II and ex Ambassador to Japan, had long been involved in the anti Nazi intellectual movement in Berlin. At a tea party hosted by her, a new member was included in the circle, an attractive young Swiss doctor named Reckse. It turned out that Dr. Reckse was an agent of the Gestapo, to which he reported on the tea party and turned over several incriminating documents.
The Solf circle was tipped off and had to flee for their lives, but they were all rounded up on January 12, 1944. Eventually everyone who was involved in the Solf Circle except Frau Solf and her daughter, the Countess Lagi Gr fin von Ballestrem, were executed.
One of those executed was Otto Kiep, an official in the Foreign Office, who had friends in the Abwehr, among whom were Erich Vermehren and his wife, the former Countess Elizabeth von Plettenberg, who were stationed as agents in Istanbul. Both were summoned to Berlin by the Gestapo in connection with the Kiep case. Fearing for their lives, they contacted the British and defected.
It was mistakenly believed in Berlin that the Vermehrens absconded with the Abwehr's secret codes and turned them over to the British. That proved to be the last straw for Hitler. Despite the efforts of the Abwehr to shift the blame to the SS or even to the Foreign Ministry, Hitler had had enough of Canaris and he told Himmler so twice. He summoned the chief of the Abwehr for a final interview and accused him of allowing the Abwehr to "fall into bits". Canaris quietly agreed that it was "not surprising", as Germany was already losing the war.
Hitler fired Canaris on the spot, and on February 18, 1944, Hitler signed a decree that abolished the Abwehr. Its functions were taken over by the RSHA. This action deprived the armed forces (and the anti Nazi conspirators) of an intelligence service of its own and strengthened Himmler's control over the generals.
Canaris, by this time a vice admiral, was cashiered and given the empty position of chief of the Office of Commercial and Economic Warfare. He was arrested on July 23, 1944 in the aftermath of the July 20 Plot against Hitler and executed shortly before the end of the war, along with Oster his deputy. The functions of the Abwehr were then totally absorbed by the ''Sicherheitsdienst'', a sub office of the ''Schutzstaffel'' (SS) security command, the RSHA.
Chiefs of the Abwehr
Col. Friedrich Gempp (19211927)
Major G nther Schwantes (19271929)
Lt. Col. Ferdinand von Bredow (19291932)
Rear Adm. Konrad Patzig (19321935)
Vice Adm. Wilhelm Canaris (19351944)
See also
Hans Oster, Canaris' deputy
Erwin von Lahousen, chief of German sabotage
Nikolaus Ritter
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Oskar Schindler, another Abwehr agent
Category:German intelligence agencies
Category:German loanwords
de:Abwehr (Nachrichtendienst)
fr:Abwehr
he:
nl:Abwehr
nb:Abwehr
pl:Abwehra
ru:
sr:
fi:Abwehr
sv:Abwehr
'''Ancient Pueblo People''', or '''Ancestral Puebloans''' is a preferred term for the cultural group of people often known as '''Anasazi''' who are the ancestors of the modern Pueblo peoples. The ancestral Puebloans were a prehistoric Native American civilization centered around the present day Four Corners area of the Southwest United States. Archaeologists still debate when a distinct culture emerged, but the current consensus, based on terminology defined by the Pecos Classification, suggests their emergence around 1200 B.C., the Basketmaker II Era.
The civilization is perhaps best known for the jacal, adobe and sandstone dwellings that they built along cliff walls, particularly during the Pueblo II and Pueblo III eras. The best preserved examples of those dwellings are in parks such as Chaco Culture National Historical Park, Mesa Verde National Park, Hovenweep National Monument, Bandelier National Monument, and Canyon de Chelly National Monument. These villages, called pueblos by Mexican settlers, were often only accessible by rope or through rock climbing.
The Ancestral Puebloans are also known for their unique style of pottery, today considered valuable for their rarity. They also created many petroglyphs and pictographs.
The Ancestral Puebloans migrated from their ancient homeland for several complex reasons. These may include pressure from Numic speaking peoples moving onto the Colorado Plateau as well as climate change which resulted in agricultural failures. Confirming evidence for climatic change in North America is found in excavations of western regions in the Mississippi Valley between A.D. 1150 and 1350 which show long lasting patterns of warmer, wetter winters and cooler, dryer summers. Most modern Pueblo peoples (whether Keresans, Hopi, or Tanoans) and historians like James W. Loewen, in his book ''Lies Across America'', assert these people did not "vanish," as is commonly portrayed, but merged into the various pueblo peoples whose descendants still live in Arizona and New Mexico. This perspective is not new and was also presented in reports from early 20th century anthropologists, including Frank Hamilton Cushing, J. Walter Fewkes and Alfred V. Kidder. Many modern Pueblo tribes trace their lineage from settlements in the Anasazi area and areas inhabited by their cultural neighbors, the Mogollon. For example, the San Ildefonso Pueblo people believe that their ancestors lived in both the Mesa Verde area and the current Bandelier.
Anasazi as a cultural label
The term "Anasazi" was established in archaeological terminology through the Pecos Classification system in 1927. Archaeologist Linda Cordell discussed the word's etymology and use:
:"''The name "Anasazi" has come to mean "ancient people," although the word itself is Navajo, meaning "enemy ancestors."'' The Navajo word is ''anaas z '' (''anaa '' "enemy", ''s z '' "ancestor"). ''It is unfortunate that a non Pueblo word has come to stand for a tradition that is certainly ancestral Pueblo. The term was first applied to ruins of the Mesa Verde by Richard Wetherill, a rancher and trader who, in 1888 1889, was the first Anglo American to explore the sites in that area. Wetherill knew and worked with Navajos and understood what the word meant. The name was further sanctioned in archaeology when it was adopted by Alfred V. Kidder, the acknowledged dean of Southwestern Archaeology. Kidder felt that is was less cumbersome than a more technical term he might have used. Subsequently some archaeologists who would try to change the term have worried that because the Pueblos speak different languages, there are different words for "ancestor," and using one might be offensive to people speaking other languages.''
Some modern Pueblo peoples object to the use of the term ''Anasazi'', although there is still controversy among them on a native alternative. The modern Hopi use the word "''Hisatsinom''" in preference to Anasazi. However, Navajo Nation Historic Preservation Department (NNHPD) spokeman Ronald Maldonado has indicated the Navajo do not favor use of the term "Ancestral Puebloan." In fact, reports submitted for review by NNHPD are rejected if they include use of the term.
Cultural divisions
Archaeological cultural units such as "Anasazi", Hohokam, Patayan or Mogollon are used by archaeologists to define material culture similarities and differences that may identify prehistoric socio cultural units which may be understood as equivalent to modern tribes, societies or peoples. The names and divisions are classificatory devices based on theoretical perspectives, analytical methods and data available at the time of analysis and publication. They are subject to change, not only on the basis of new information and discoveries, but also as attitudes and perspectives change within the scientific community. It should not be assumed that an archaeological division or culture unit corresponds to a particular language group or to a socio political entity such as a ''tribe''.
When making use of modern cultural divisions in the American Southwest, it is important to understand three limitations in the current conventions:
Archaeological research focuses on items left behind during peoples activities fragments of pottery vessels, human remains, stone tools or evidence left from the construction of dwellings. However, many other aspects of the culture of prehistoric peoples are not tangible. Languages spoken by these people and their beliefs and behavior are difficult to decipher from physical materials. Cultural divisions are tools of the modern scientist, and so should not be considered similar to divisions or relationships the ancient residents may have recognized. Modern cultures in this region, many of whom claim some of these ancient people as ancestors, contain a striking range of diversity in lifestyles, social organization, language and religious beliefs. This suggests the ancient people were also more diverse than their material remains may suggest.
The modern term style has a bearing on how material items such as pottery or architecture can be interpreted. Within a people, different means to accomplish the same goal can be adopted by subsets of the larger group. For example, in modern Western cultures, there are alternative styles of clothing that characterized older and younger generations. Some cultural differences may be based on linear traditions, on teaching from one generation or school to another. Other varieties in style may have distinguished between arbitrary groups within a culture, perhaps defining status, gender, clan or guild affiliation, religious belief or cultural alliances. Variations may also simply reflect the different resources available in a given time or area.
Defining cultural groups, such as the Ancient Pueblo peoples, tends to create an image of territories separated by clear cut boundaries, like modern state lines. These simply did not exist. ''Prehistoric people traded, worshipped and collaborated most often with other nearby groups. Cultural differences should therefore be understood as '' clinal '', "increasing gradually as the distance separating groups also increases."'' (Plog, p. 72.) Departures from the expected pattern may occur because of unidentified social or political situations or because of geographic barriers. In the Southwest, mountain ranges, rivers and, most obviously, the Grand Canyon can be significant barriers for human communities, likely reducing the frequency of contact with other groups. Current opinion holds that the closer cultural similarity between the Mogollon and Ancient Pueblos and their greater differences from the Hohokam and Patayan is due to both the geography and the variety of climate zones in the Southwest.
References
Cordell, Linda S. ''Ancient Pueblo Peoples''. St. Remy Press and Smithsonian Institution, 1994. ISBN 0 89599 038 5.
Fagan, Brian M. "Ancient North America: Tha Archaeology of a Continent (part five)." Thames and Hudson, Inc., New York, New York, 1991. ISBN 0 500 05075 9.
Plog, Stephen. ''Ancient Peoples of the American Southwest''. Thames and Hudson, London, England, 1997. ISBN 0 500 27939 X.
Sofaer, Anna , Director. "Mystery of Chaco Canyon." 1999. DVD VHS. Bullfrog Films. Blurb: "Unveiling the ancient astronomy of southwestern Pueblo Indians." Sequel to "The Sun Dagger."
See also
Chacoans
Cliff Palace
Hopi
Kiva
Kokopelli
Matrilocality
Newspaper Rock State Historic Monument
Pueblo people
sipapu
Taos Pueblo
Zuni
External links
Holmes Anthropology Museum
Category:Ancient peoples
Category:Archaeological cultures
Category:Native American culture
Category:Native American history
Category:Pottery
de:Anasazi
fa:
fr:Anasazi
it:Anasazi
pl:Anasazi
'''Aalborg''' is a municipality (Danish, ''kommune'') in North Jutland County on the Jutland peninsula in northern Denmark. The municipality straddles the Limfjord, the waterway which connects the North Sea and the Kattegat east to west, and which separates the main body of the Jutland peninsula from the island of Vendsyssel Thy north to south.
It is also the name of the municipality's main city and the site of its municipal council, as well as the name of a seaport.
The municipality and the town have chosen to retain the traditional spelling of the name as ''Aalborg'', although the new spelling '' lborg'' is used in other contexts, such as lborg Bay ('' lborg Bugt''), the body of water which lies to the east of the Jutland peninsula.
The municipality, which includes the island of Egholm, covers an area of 560 km , and has a total population of 192,353 (2005). The mayor of the municipality is Henning G. Jensen, a member of the Social Democrats (''Socialdemokraterne'') political party.
Neighboring municipalities are Sejlflod and Hals to the east, Dronninglund and Br nderslev to the north, Aabybro and Nibe to the west, and St vring and Sk rping to the south. The waters splitting the municipality are called ''Langerak'' to the east and ''Gj l Bredning'' to the west. The island of Egholm is located in ''Gj l Bredning'', and is connected by ferry to the city of Aalborg at its southern shore.
By January 1, 2007 Aalborg municipality will, as the result of ''Kommunalreformen'' ("The Municipality Reform" of 2007), be merged with existing Hals, Nibe, and Sejlflod municipalities to form the new Aalborg municipality. This will create a municipality with an area of 1,171 km . The new municipality will belong to the new Region Nordjylland ("North Jutland Region").
Surroundings
The area is typical for the north of Jutland. To the west the Limfjord broadens into an irregular lake (salt water), with low, marshy shores and many islands. Northwest is Store Vildmose ("Greater Wild bog"), a swamp where a mirage is sometimes seen in summer. Southeast lies the similar Lille Vildmose ("Lesser Wild bog"). Store Vildmose was drained and farmed in the beginning of the 20th century, and Lille Vildmose is now the largest moor in Denmark.
The city of Aalborg
The city of Aalborg is the fourth largest city in Denmark after Copenhagen, Aarhus and Odense. It is the location of Aalborg Air Base, an important base of the Danish air force, and is the seat of a Lutheran bishop.
Railway connects Aalborg with Hj rring, Frederikshavn, and Skagen to the north, and with Aarhus and the lines from Germany to the south, as well as to Copenhagen in the east over the island of Funen.
The harbour is good and safe, though fairly difficult to access.
History
Aalborg traces its history back over 1000 years. It was originally settled as a trading post, because of its position on the Limfjord. The sites of what were two settlements and a visible burial ground can be seen on Lindholm H je, a hill overlooking the city. The size of these settlements emphasise the significance of this place as a crossroads.
The first mention of Aalborg under its original name ''Alabu'', is found on a coin dated to 1040.
During the Middle Ages, Aalborg prospered and became one of the largest cities in Denmark. This prosperity was further enhanced when in 1516 Aalborg was granted a monopoly in salt herring.
Aalborg received town privileges in 1342 and the bishopric dates from 1554.
During the German invasion of Denmark in 1940, the Aalborg Aerodrome was captured by Nazi paratroopers very early in the action.
Industry
Aalborg is a growing industrial and commercial centre, exporting grain, cement and fish.
It is home to De Danske Spritfabrikker's ("Danish Distillers") aquavit snaps, production facility for the distillation of the Aalborg family of akvavits consisting of 17 different brands. Danish Distillers is Scandinavia's largest producer and supplier of spirits for consumption, and is the world's largest producer and exporter of aquavit, supplying over 140 geographic markets.
It is also the centre of a growing telecomunications industry originating from the Aalborg University.
.
Carnival in Aalborg
The annual carnival takes place the last weekend in May.
During the carnival, Aalborg receives about 100,000 people. Friday The Battle of Carnival Bands is an exciting and colourful evening with processions through the city when all the participating groups compete to be the leading carnival group.
The carnival itself is the following Saturday on this day the city centre is full of life. The streets are filled with gaily dressed people who are in a real spring mood. In Kilde Park concerts are given from various stages all day to midnight. The Carnival ends with a grand firework display on the harbour.
Architecture and tourist attractions
The old castle Aalborghus Castle (''Aalborghus Slot'') and some picturesque houses of the 17th century remain in the center of the town. The half timbered (''bindingsv rk'') castle was built in 1550 by King Christian III, and was converted to government administration offices in the 1950s.
Budolfi Church cathedral dates mostly from the middle of the 18th century, while ''Vor Frue Kirke'' (Church of Our Lady) was partially burnt in 1894. The foundations of both churches are from the 14th century or earlier.
There are also an ancient hospital and a museum of art and antiquities.
On the north side of the Limfjord is N rresundby, which is connected to Aalborg by a road bridge, an iron railway bridge, as well as a motorway tunnel running under the Limfjord. N rresundby is the site of the Lindholm H je settlement and burial ground from the Germanic Iron Age and Viking times. There is also a museum on the site.
Aalborgt rnet. A tripod tower erected in 1933. The tower still gives an exquisite view over the
fjord and the city from its 105 m rise over the sea level.
! Famous residents of the municipality
Twinning
Aalborg maintains cultural, economic and educational ties with some 25 cities around the globe, among others Edinburgh, Scotland. Thus, Aalborg has the most twin cities in Denmark. Every five years Aalborg gathers youth from the majority of its twin cities for a week of sports games, known as Ungdomslegene (The Youth Games).
Other information
The city has a football team playing in the Danish Superleague, Aalborg Boldspilklub, which is known as AaB.
The city has the highest number of hairdresser shops, tattoo shops, bars, night clubs, pubs and solariums per inhabitant in Denmark.
See Also
Aalborg monastery
External links
References
Municipal statistics: , delivered from aka Kommunedata (Municipal Data)
Municipal mergers and neighbors:
Category:Municipalities of Denmark
Category:Cities and towns in Denmark
bg:
da: lborg
de:Aalborg
es:Aalborg
fr:Aalborg
gl:Aalborg lborg
it:Aalborg
hu:Aalborg
nl:Aalborg
no: lborg
pl:Aalborg
ro:Aalborg
fi:Aalborg
sv: lborg
:''For the Aarhus convention on public participation, see Aarhus Convention.''
of Aarhus.
'''Aarhus''', also commonly known by its Danish spelling ''' rhus''', is the second largest city in Denmark. It is the principal port on the east coast of Jutland. Aarhus is also the location of the council of both Aarhus municipality and Aarhus County.
Demographics
The city's population is 294,954 (July 2005) .
The town lies at the junction of railway lines from all parts of the country in a low lying, fertile, and well wooded district. To the southwest (13 miles by rail), a picturesque region that contains the Guden and several lakes extends west from the railway junction of Skanderborg, and rises to ground exceeding 500 feet in the Himmelbjerget. The railway traverses this pleasant district of moorland and woodland to Silkeborg, a modern town with one of the most attractive situations in the kingdom.
The harbour is good and safe, and agricultural produce is exported, while coal and iron are among the chief imports.
The bishopric of Aarhus dates back at least from 951. Aarhus' 13th century cathedral, The rhus Domkirke, is the largest church in Denmark, as well as the second largest in Northern Europe, being only 1.5ft shorter than its counterpart in Trondheim.
Aarhus is also home to one of the few ghettos in Denmark: Gellerup
One major tourist attraction in Aarhus is The Old Town (Danish: ''Den Gamle By''), which is not actually an old part of the city itself, but a collection of old buildings from Danish history gathered from all around the country.
The Lord Mayor of Aarhus is Nicolai Wammen of the Social Democrats.
Aarhus is the home of University of Aarhus, Aarhus School of Business and the University College of Aarhus.
History
! Insert history intro here
The name
In medieval times, the city was called ''Arus'', and in Icelandic chronicles, it was known as '' r ss''. It is a compound of the two words '' r'', genitive of '' '' "river" (Modern Danish '' '') and '' ss'' "mouth" (obsolete in Modern Danish in Modern Icelandic this word is still used for "river delta"). The city is located on the mouth of the small river rhus .
Through regular sound development, Medieval Danish ''Arus'' became ''Aars'' or ''Oes'', a form, which persisted in the dialects of the surrounding parishes until the 20th century. In 1406 ''Aarhus'' became revalent in the written sources, and gradually became the norm in the 17th century. ''Aarhus'' is probably a remodelling after the numerous Low German place names in '' husen'', possibly as a result of the influence of German merchants.
The city is mentioned the first time by Adam of Bremen who mentions that "Reginbrand, bishop of the church of Aarhus (Harusam)" participates in a church meeting in the city of Ingelham in Germany.
Viking times
The oldest archaelogical findings in Aarhus are glass pearls which date to the end of the 7th century. Half buried Long houses, used both as homes and workshops for the Vikings have also been found.
In the houses and the adjoining archaelogical layers, combs, jewelry and basic multi purpose tools have been found that indicate the settlement is from approximately year 900. Digs in the spring of 2005 revealed a so called city ditch from the year 850 which might have marked the trade centre upon which the city is built.
The finding of six rune stones in and around Aarhus indicates the city had some significance around year 1000 as only wealthy nobles traditionally used them.
1600 1700
During the wars of the 17th century, it is probable that the city suffered a great deal. Fortifications still exist south of the city as a reminder of the German imperial campaigns between 1627 and 1629. In 1644, Sweden taxed the city harshly and between 1657 and 1659, it was occupied by Swedish troops on several occasions.
In spite of these and other misfortunes, such as plague and city wide fires, Aarhus was still quite a significant city in Denmark due to its favourable geographical position which was of significant importance for trading. Trade came mainly from the inland of Jutland but also from Norway, L beck, Amsterdam, England, France and Spain. In the middle of the 18th century the trade fleet consisted of approximately 100 ships.
1800
In the 19th century, the city gained more independence from the dominance of Copenhagen and Hamburg. While it had been the third largest city in Jutland during the early 19th century, its population surpassed Randers in 1840 and in 1850, lborg, thus becoming the largest city in Jutland and the second largest in Denmark.
The city's material prosperity continued to increase as the harbour expanded and the railway network grew. Culturally, it marketed itself as the "Capital of Jutland" and expanded many of its cultural institutions like the national library, universities, the Aarhus Theater and hospitals.
Suburbs of Aarhus (listed by zip code)
''8000'' rhus C
''8200'' rhus N
''8210'' rhus V
''8220'' Brabrand
''8230'' byh j
''8240'' Risskov
''8250'' Eg
''8260'' Viby J
''8270'' H jbjerg
''8310'' Tranbjerg J
''8320'' M rslet
''8330'' Beder
''8340'' Malling
''8355'' Solbjerg
''8361'' Hasselager
''8380'' Trige
''8381'' Tilst
''8462'' Harlev
''8471'' Sabro
''8520'' Lystrup
''8530'' Hjortsh j
''8541'' Sk dstrup
Buildings and constructions
Telecommunication Tower Arhus (Concrete tower with guyed mast on its top, not accessible for visitors)
Skejby Sygehus (the second largest hospital in Denmark)
External links
Official websites
Educational institutions
Culture
Category:Aarhus
Category:Cities and towns in Denmark
bg:
cs: rhus
da: rhus
de: rhus
es: rhus
eo:Arhuzo
fr: rhus
gl:Aarhus rhus
id:Aarhus
it: rhus
hu:Aarhus
lv:Orh sa
nl:Aarhus
ja:
no: rhus
pl: rhus
ro: rhus
sr:
fi: rhus
sv: rhus
tr:Orhus
Taxobox
color pink
name Northern cavefish
status
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis Actinopterygii
ordo Percopsiformes
familia Amblyopsidae
genus ''Amblyopsis''
species '''''A. spelea'''''
binomial ''Amblyopsis spelea''
binomial authority (DeKay, 1842)
The '''Nothern Cavefish''' also know as the '''Northern Blindfish''', ''Amblyopsis spelea'' is found in caves through Kentucky and southern Indiana. It is listed as a threatened species in the United States and the IUCN lists the species as vulnerable.
The White River, flowing east to west south of Bedford, Indiana, delimits the northern range of ''Amblyopsis spelea''. These fish are not found in caves north of the White River.
Category:Percopsiformes
References
The term '''abandonment''' has a multitude of uses which can generally be broken into legal and extra legal uses. This "signpost article" provides a guide to the various uses of the word via links to articles that deal with each of the distinct concepts at length.
Uses in law
'''Abandonment''' in law, the relinquishment of an interest, claim, privilege or possession. This broad meaning has a number of applications in different branches of law.
In common law jurisdictions, both ''common law abandonment'' and ''statutory abandonment'' of property may be recognized. A common law abandonment may be generally defined as "the relinquishment of a right in property by the owner thereof without any regard to future possession by himself or any other person, and with the intention to foresake or desert the right...." 1 ''Corpus Juris Secundum'' Abandonment 2 (1985) (emphasis added) footnotes and citations omitted . Common law abandonment is "the voluntary relinquishment of a thing by its owner with the intention of terminating his ownership, and without the intention of vesting ownership in any other person the giving up of a thing absolutely, without reference to any particular person or purpose...." Id. (emphasis added) footnotes and citations omitted . An example of statutory abandonment in a common law jurisdiction is abandonment by a bankruptcy trustee under ).
Abandonment of an action (see Judicature Acts), relates to a plaintiff's discontinuance of proceedings ongoing before the High Court of Justice of England and Wales and which procedure changed substantially as a result of reforms to the judiciary of the United Kingdom in 1875.
In marine insurance parlance, abandonment involves the surrender of a ship or goods to the insurer.
In the domain of copyrights, abandonment is recognized as the explicit release of material by a copyright holder into the public domain. However, statutory abandonment is a relatively unclear area of copyright law and the more common approach is to license work under a scheme that provides for public use rather than strictly abandoning copyright. For more information consult "disclaimer of interest".
In the military practice and law, abandonment of a military post by a soldier can be called desertion, and the condition of being away from that post can be called being "Away Without Leave".
In family circumstances, child abandonment is often recognized as a crime, in which case the child is usually not physically harmed directly as part of the abandonment distinct from this is the widely recognized crime of infanticide.
! '''Abandonment of wife and children''' is sometimes called ''desertion,'' and is somewhat difficult to prove in court. The plaintiff must generally show his or spouse to have left for over a year and failed to pay support, as well as proving that the departure was not agreed upon and also not caused by the plaintiff. Because abandonment by a husband often left his wife and children destitute (and hence a burden upon the public purse), it used to be a felony in most American states. At present, nearly all states have abolished the felony of abandonment, but it remains in place in a few states like Massachusetts. The abandonment or exposure of a young child under the age of two, which is an indictable misdemeanor, is commonly called ''cruelty to children.''
'''Abandonment of domicile''' is the ceasing to reside permanently in a former domicile coupled with the intention of choosing a new domicile. The presumptions which will guide the court in deciding whether a former domicile has been abandoned or not must be inferred from the facts of each individual case. In the United States, a tenant is generally understood to have abandoned a property if he or she has fallen behind in rent and shown a lack of interest in continuing to live there. The landlord must then send notice of the intent to sell the property and wait a certain number of days to take action on it. How long the landlord has to wait depends on the value of the property the landlord can keep the money up to the costs incurred as a result of the abandonment the rest must be set aside for the former tenant, should she or he eventually return.
'''Abandonment of an easement''' is the relinquishment of some accommodation or right in another's land, such as right of way, free access of light and air, etc. See easement.
'''''Abandonment of railways''''' has a legal signification in England recognized by statute, by authority of which the Board of Trade may, under certain circumstances, grant a warrant to a railway authorizing the abandonment of its line or part of it.
'''Abandonment of trademark''' is understood to happen when a trademark is not used for three or more years, or when it is deliberately discontinued trademark law protects only trademarks being actively used and defended. An example of an abandoned trademark is ''aspirin'', once a mark of the Bayer company, now considered a generic term.
Extra legal uses
Outside of legal circles, '''abandonment''' has additional meanings and uses:
'''''Abandonment''''' is a play about love, death, identity and evolution. It is a complex mixture of social comedy and family drama, reminding us that the past is not as far away as we think. Written by Kate Atkinson.
'''Child abandonment in film and literature''':
''Bachelor Mother'' (Garson Kanin US, 1939)
'''Abandonment of a patient''', in medicine, is where a health care professional (usually a physician, nurse, dentist, or paramedic) has already begun emergency treatment of a patient and then suddenly walks away while the patient is still in need, without securing the services of an adequate substitute, or giving the patient adequate opportunity to find one. It is a crime in many countries and can result in the loss of one's license to practice. Also, because of the public policy in favor of keeping people alive, the professional cannot defend himself or herself by pointing to the patient's inability to pay for services, the possibility of exposure to malpractice liability beyond one's insurance coverage, or the patient's inability to stop screaming (because of extreme pain).
Category:Legal terms
be:
da:Abandon
de:Abandon
it:Abbandono
pl:Abandon
ru:
The word '''abatement''' has various meanings, many of them legal. The word came through French ''abattre'' from Latin ''ab'' Late Latin ''battuere'' "to beat" (which came from Germanic). It means a beating down or reducing or doing away with something.
Abatement of a nuisance, the remedy allowed by law to a person or public authority injured by a public nuisance, letting him destroy or remove it, if doing so causes no breach of the peace. In the case of private nuisances, abatement is also allowed if it causes no breach of the peace and no damage beyond what removing the nuisance requires.
Abatement of freehold happens where, after the person last seised dies, a stranger enters upon lands before the entry of the heir or devisee, and keeps the heir or devisee out of possession.
Intrusion, an entry by a stranger when a tenant for life dies, to the prejudice of the reversioner or remainder man.
Disseisin, the forcible or fraudulent expulsion of a person seised of the freehold.
Abatement of debts and legacies, a common law doctrine of wills that holds that when the equitable assets of a deceased person are not sufficient to satisfy fully all the creditors, their debts must abate proportionately
Abatement in pleading, or plea in abatement, was a plea by the defendant, defeating or quashing a legal action by some matter of fact, such as a defect in form or the personal incompetency of the parties suing. It did not involve the merits of the cause, but left the right of action subsisting. In criminal proceedings, a plea in abatement was at one time a common practice in answer to an indictment, and was set up to defeat the indictment as framed, by alleging that the defendant was wrongly named ("misnomer") or was otherwise wrongly described. Its effect for this purpose was nullified by the Criminal Law Act 1826, which required the court to amend according to the truth, and the Criminal Procedure Act 1851 (see Criminal Procedure), which rendered description of the defendant unnecessary. All pleas in abatement are now abolished (R.S.G. Order 21, r. 20).
Abatement in litigation, in civil proceedings, no action abates because any of the parties marries or dies or becomes bankrupt, if the cause of the action survives or continues, and does not become defective because any estate or title is assigned or created or devolved ''pendente lite'' (R.S.C. Order 17, r. 1). Criminal proceedings do not abate on the death of the prosecutor, being in theory instituted by the crown but the crown may terminate them without deciding on the merits and without the assent of the prosecutor.
Abatement of false lights, by the Merchant Shipping Act 1854, the general lighthouse authority has power to order the extinguishment or screening of any light which may be mistaken for a light proceeding from a lighthouse.
Abatement in commerce is a deduction sometimes made at a custom house from the fixed duties on certain kinds of goods, on account of damage or loss sustained in warehouses. The rate and conditions of such deductions are regulated, in England, by the Customs Consolidation Act 1853. (See also drawback and rebate (marketing).)
Abatement (heraldry) is a badge in coat armour, indicating some kind of degradation or dishonour. It is also called rebatement. Though most abatements have existed only in theory, there has been at least one imposition of an abatement in Scotland.
Category:Legal terms
'''Ale''' is an ancient word for a fermented alcoholic beverage obtained chiefly from malted barley.
Before the introduction of hops into England from the Netherlands in the 15th century the name "ale" was exclusively applied to unhopped fermented beverages, the term "beer" being gradually introduced to describe a brew with an infusion of hops. This distinction no longer applies.
A modern ale is commonly defined by the strain of yeast used and the fermenting temperature.
''Strain of Yeast'': An ale yeast is normally considered to be a top fermenting yeast, though a number of British brewers, such as Fullers and Weltons, use ale yeast strains that settle at the bottom. Common features of ale yeasts regardless of top or bottom fermentation is that they ferment more quickly than lager yeasts, they convert less of the sugar into alcohol (giving a sweeter, fuller body) and they produce more esters (which give a fruity taste) and diacetyl (which gives a buttery taste).
''Fermenting Temperature'': Ale is typically fermented at higher temperatures than lager beer (15 23 C, 60 75 F). Ale yeasts at these temperatures produce significant amounts of esters and other secondary flavor and aroma products, and the result is a beer with slightly "fruity" compounds resembling but not limited to apple, pear, pineapple, banana, plum or prune.
''Stylistic Difference to Lager'': Stylistic differences between some ales and lagers can be difficult to categorize. Steam beer, K lsch and some modern British Golden Summer Beers are seen as hybrids, using elements of both lager and ale production, while Baltic Porter and Bi re de Garde may be produced by either lager or ale methods or a combination of both. However, lager is commonly perceived to be cleaner tasting, drier and lighter in the mouth than ale.
In a number of U.S. states, especially in the western United States, "ale" is the term mandated by state law for any beverage fermented from grain with an alcoholic strength above that which can legally be named "beer," without regard to the method of fermentation or the yeast used. This distinction is not obsolete, but it is idiosyncratic.
In former times the Welsh and Scots had two distinct kinds of ale, called ''common'' and ''spiced'' ales, the relative values of which (compared to mead) were appraised by law in the following terms:
:''If a farmer have no mead, he shall pay two casks of spiced ale, or four casks of common ale, for one cask of mead.''
Ales are very common in Britain, Germany, the United States, and Belgium however, Lager but please see the discussion page about the term lager is the dominant style of beer in almost all countries, worldwide.
Varieties of ale
British Irish American ales
British and Irish ales are, worldwide, the most popular variety of beer fermented with top fermented yeast. Most beers in this region typically are made with yeast strains that leave some esters behind, producing flavors often described as "fruity" or "buttery". "Earthy" English hops are added, adding to the complexity. Within this region, a wide variety of substyles can be found, ranging from roasted malt ales (porter, stout), to highly hopped ales (India pale ale), to malt balanced ales. Alcohol ranges from the very low (e.g. the English mild beer) to the very high (e.g. the English barley wine).
American style ales rose out of the microbrewery craft brewing revolution that began in the early 1980s. Typically, these ales are very similar to their British counterparts, but have cleaner yeast strains, and often have higher hop rates dominated by American varieties (such as the citrusy Cascade hop.)
Any of these styles, when cask conditioned, can be termed cask ale, and when unfiltered in the bottle can be termed bottle conditioned. CAMRA is a British organization that promotes real ale.
Amber Red ale
Barleywine
Bitter
Pale ale
India pale ale or Imperial pale ale or Strong pale ale
Light ale
Summer ale
Blonde Golden ale
Brown ale
Cream ale
Mild ale (or just "mild")
Old ale
Irish red ale
Scotch ale
Porter
Robust Porter
Brown Porter
Stout
Irish stout or Dry stout
Imperial stout
Milk stout or Sweet stout
Oatmeal stout
Chocolate stout
Oyster stout
Coffee stout
Belgian ales
Belgium produces a wide variety of specialty ales that elude easy classification. In addition to making a variety of blonde ale, common classifications for these specialty beers may be dubbel (malty complex with a red hue) and tripel (a high alcohol, lightly gold colored beer).
Some specialty beers are based on monastic brewing recipes. The best known among them are the Trappist beers, which are brewed under direct control of the monks themselves. Only six Trappist monasteries in Belgium and one in the Netherlands brew this beer. Similar styled ales, brewed by commercial breweries (sometimes under licence of an actual monastery) are called Abbey beer.
German barley ales
These are old style ales fermented in Germany. A long, cold conditioning period yields a cleaner style, free of the esters that one finds in UK ales.
Altbier
K lsch
Wheat beer
Wheat beer is found mostly in Germany, but examples can also be found in the United States and Belgium. German wheat beers are typically fermented with a yeast that yields esters with banana and clovelike flavours. In contrast to most styles, these beers are typically served unfiltered (with the suspended yeast clouding the beverage, thus the German name 'heffe' for yeast). In American microbreweries, wheat beer is usually fermented with a clean yeast and filtered. Often this beer is combined with fruit flavors (e.g. raspberry wheat beers) to create a light, refreshing drink.
Belgian witbier bi re blanche
Weissbier, Hefeweizen and Dunkelweizen
Specialty ales
Lambic a sour ale fermented by wild yeast, sometimes flavored with fruit.
Berliner Weisse a low strength sour wheat ale originating in Berlin.
Flanders ale (Saison, Oud Bruin, Bi re de Garde) a unique farmhouse style sour ale produced primarily in the Flanders region of Belgium and France.
Rauchbier a style of beer made with smoked malt. While beers called Rauchbier may be ale, the classic examples are technically lagers.
Category:Beer
! The below are interlanguage links.
da:Ale
de:Ale (Bier)
es:Ale
fr:Ale
nn:Ale
pl:Ale
fi:Ale
sv:Ale ( ltyp)
th: ( )
The word '''amateur''' has at least two connotations. In the first, more widely used manner, it means someone performing some task without pay, in contrast to a "professional" who would be paid for the same task. In this sense, labeling someone an "amateur" can have a negative connotation. For example, amateur athletes in sports such as basketball or football would not be regarded as having ability on par with professional athletes in those sports.
Where this can be interesting is in the case of the Olympic Games. Most Olympic events required that the athletes be amateurs, or non professionals. To receive pay to perform the sport could have disqualified an athlete from an event, as in the case of Jim Thorpe. Such regulations are now nonexistent for all Olympic sports with the exception of boxing.
Also in the areas of computer programming and open source, as well as astronomy and ornithology, many amateurs make very meaningful contributions equivalent to or exceeding those of the professionals. To many, description as an amateur is losing its negative meaning, and actually carries a badge of honor.
The other, perhaps somewhat obsolescent usage, stems from the French form of the Latin root of the word meaning a "lover of". (''See amateurism''.) In this sense, retaining its French inflexion ("am a tEUR"), an amateur may be as competent as a paid professional, yet is motivated by a love or passion for the activity, like a ''connoisseur''. In the 17th and 18th centuries ''virtuoso'' had similar connotations of passionate involvement.
Indeed, another thriving example of such work is Amateur Dramatics whether plays or musical theater. Often performed to high standards (but lacking the budgets of the professional West End theatre Broadway theatreversions) and with an intense passion for the scene.
It has been suggested that the crude, all or nothing categories of professional or amateur should be reconsidered. A historical shift is occurring with the rise of Pro Ams, a new category of people that are pursuing amateur activities to professional standards.
See also
volunteer
hobby, particularly for Amateur Radio (also known as ''ham radio''.)
category:occupations
da:Amat r
de:Amateur
es:Amateur
fr:Amateur
nl:Amateur
ja:
no:Amat r
sv:Amat r
'''Ambrose Gwinnett Bierce''' (June 24, 18421914?) was an American satirist, critic, poet, short story writer, editor, and journalist.
His clear style and lack of sentimentality have kept him popular when many of his contemporaries have become obscure. His dark, sardonic views and vehemence as a critic, earned him the nickname "Bitter Bierce". Such was Bierce's venerable reputation, that it was feared that his judgment on any contemporary fiction of the day could "make or break" a writer's career.
Early life and military career
Born in a rural area of Meigs County, Ohio, Bierce resided during his adolescence in the town of Elkhart, Indiana. At the outset of the American Civil War, Bierce enlisted in the Ninth Regiment, Indiana Volunteers, as part of the Union Army. In February 1862, he was commissioned as a first lieutenant and served on the staff of Gen. William Babcock Hazen as a topographical engineer, making maps of likely battlefields. He fought bravely in several of the war's most important battles, at one point receiving newspaper attention for his daring rescue under fire of a gravely wounded comrade at the battle of Girard Hill, West Virginia. In June, 1864, he received a serious head wound at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain and spent the rest of the summer on furlough, but returned to active duty in September, and was ultimately discharged from the army in January 1865.
His military career, however, resumed when, in the summer of 1866, he rejoined Gen. Hazen as part of the latter's expedition to inspect military outposts across the Western plains. The expedition proceeded by horseback and wagon from Omaha, Nebraska, arriving in San Francisco near the end of the year.
Journalism
In San Francisco, Bierce resigned from the Army and received the rank of brevet Major. He remained there for many years, eventually becoming famous as a contributor and or editor for a number of local newspapers and periodicals, including ''The San Francisco News Letter'', ''The Argonaut'', and ''The Wasp''. Bierce lived and wrote in England from 1872 to 1875. Returning to the United States, he again took up residence in San Francisco. In 18791880, he went to Rockerville and Deadwood, South Dakota, in the Dakota Territory, to try his hand as local manager for a New York mining company, but when the company failed he returned to San Francisco and resumed his career in journalism. In 1887, he became one of the first regular columnists and editorialists to be employed on William Randolph Hearst's newspaper, the ''San Francisco Examiner'', eventually becoming one of the most prominent and influential among the writers and journalists of the West Coast. In December 1899, he moved to Washington, D.C., but continued his association with the Hearst newspapers until 1906.
The McKinley accusation
Because of his penchant for biting social criticism and satire, Bierce's long newspaper career was often steeped in controversy. On several occasions his columns stirred up a storm of hostile reaction which created difficulties for Hearst. One of the most notable of these incidents occurred following the assassination of President William McKinley when Hearst's political opponents turned a satirical poem Bierce had written in 1900 into a ''cause c l bre''. Bierce meant his poem, written on the occasion of the assassination of Governor elect William Goebel of Kentucky, to express a national mood of dismay and fear, but after McKinley was shot in 1901 it seemed to foreshadow the crime:
:''The bullet that pierced Goebel's breast''
:''Can not be found in all the West ''
:''Good reason, it is speeding here''
:''To stretch McKinley on his bier.''
Hearst was (presumably) falsely accused by rival newspapersand by then Secretary of State Elihu Rootof having called for McKinley's assassination. Despite a national uproar that ended his ambitions for the presidency (and even his membership in the Bohemian Club), Hearst neither revealed Bierce as the author of the poem, nor fired him.
Literary works
His short stories are considered among the best of the 19th century.
He wrote realistically of the terrible things he had seen in the war in such stories as "An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge", "Killed at Resaca", and "Chickamauga".
Bierce was reckoned a master of "pure" English by his contemporaries, and virtually everything that came from his pen was notable for its judicious wording and economy of style.
He wrote skillfully in a variety of literary genres, and in addition to his celebrated ghost and war stories he published several volumes of poetry and verse. His ''Fantastic Fables'' anticipated the ironic style of grotesquerie that turned into a genre in the 20th century.
One of Bierce's most famous works is his much quoted book, ''The Devil's Dictionary'', originally a newspaper serialization which was first published in book form in 1906 as ''The Cynic's Word Book.'' It offers an interesting reinterpretation of the English language in which cant and political double talk are neatly lampooned.
Bierce's twelve volume ''Collected Works'' were published in 1909, the seventh volume of which consists solely of "The Devil's Dictionary," the title Bierce himself preferred to "The Cynic's Word Book."
Disappearance
In October 1913, the septuagenarian Bierce departed Washington on a tour to revisit his old Civil War battlefields. By December, he had proceeded on through Louisiana and Texas, crossing by way of El Paso into Mexico, which was then in the throes of revolution. In Ciudad Ju rez, he joined the army of Pancho Villa as an observer, in which role he participated in the battle of Tierra Blanca. He is known to have accompanied Villa's army as far as the city of Chihuahua, Chihuahua. After a last letter to a close friend, sent from that city on December 26, 1913, he vanished without a trace, becoming one of the most famous disappearances in American literary history. Subsequent investigations to ascertain his fate were fruitless and, despite many decades of speculation, his disappearance remains a mystery.
In one of his last letters, Bierce wrote:
:Good by if you hear of my being stood up against a Mexican stone wall and shot to rags please know that I think that a pretty good way to depart this life. It beats old age, disease, or falling down the cellar stairs. To be a Gringo in Mexico ah, that is euthanasia
Bierce in popular culture
Robert W. Chambers borrowed several terms and fictional locations (including, for instance, Carcosa and Hastur) from Bierce, for use in his book of horror short stories, The King in Yellow. The horror writer H.P. Lovecraft later incorporated these into his own work, as did other authors who later extended Lovecraft's characters and themes, collectively creating the Cthulhu Mythos.
Robert Bloch's short story "I Like Blondes" (published in Playboy, 1956) is constructed around a group of alien bodysnatchers frequenting Earth. The narrator's host body's "name was Beers...Ambrose Beers, I believe. He picked it up in Mexico a long time ago."
At least three films have been made of Bierce's story ''An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge''. A silent movie version was made in the 1920s. A French version called ''La Rivi re du Hibou'', directed by Robert Enrico, was released in 1962 (available as of 2005). This is a black and white film, faithfully recounting the original narrative using voice over. Another version, directed by Brian James Egan, was released in 2005. The story was also used for an episode of the television series ''The Twilight Zone'': ''An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge''. A copy of ''An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge'' appeared in the ABC television series ''Lost'' (ep. "The Long Con" airdate February 8, 2006).
Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes wrote ''Gringo Viejo'' (''The Old Gringo''), a fictionalized account of Bierce's disappearance. Fuentes's keenly observed novel was later adapted as a motion picture, with Gregory Peck in the title role.
Bierce appears as a character in the 2000 movie ''From Dusk Till Dawn 3: The Hangman's Daughter'' (set in 1913, a prequel to the original ''From Dusk Till Dawn''). While traveling to join up with Villa, Bierce is first attacked by bandits, and then trapped in a bar filled with vampires bent on killing all the humans inside. This clearly fictional adventure also portrayed Bierce as an alcoholic. In that movie Ambrose Bierce was played by Michael Parks.
Bierce appears as a character in Robert A. Heinlein's novella ''Lost Legacy'', (published in the short story collection ''Assignment in Eternity''). In the story, Bierce is one of a league of humans who have learned to use the unused portions of their brains and have advanced mental powers.
Bierce appears as the main character and narrator in the story ''The Oxoxoco Bottle'' by Gerald Kersh. The bulk of the story purports to be a manuscript written by Bierce on his last journey in Mexico, and relates a very strange adventure. The manner of his death, however, remains a mystery at the end.
Bierce is depicted as a detective in series of mystery novels by Oakley Hall, including ''Ambrose Bierce and the Queen of Spades'' and ''Ambrose Bierce and the Death of Kings''.
In DC Comics's miniseries ''Stanley and His Monster'', Bierce (or at least a character claiming to be Bierce) appears as a sardonic trenchcoat clad adventurer into the supernatual, very similar to John Constantine although Bierce derides Constantine as a "clown," he admits that he and Constantine are but two of several trenchcoated occult adventurers at large in the world, perhaps an implication by the writer that the archetype of the sarcastic commentator on the occult, exemplified by Constantine, can be traced back to Bierce as narrator of his own horror stories. When the comic book Bierce learns that the boy Stanley's friend, the nameless Monster, is a demon, he considers vanquishing him but soon realizes that the Monster is a benevolent demon and instead helps Stanley and his friend against other demons.
Primary books
Tales of Soldiers and Civilians (a.k.a., In the Midst of Life) (1892)
Can Such Things Be? (1893)
Collected Works (1909)
External links
from
from
from
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambrose
Bierce, Ambroce
Bierce, Ambrose
da:Ambrose Bierce
de:Ambrose Bierce
es:Ambrose Bierce
eo:Ambrose BIERCE
fr:Ambrose Bierce
it:Ambrose Bierce
hu:Ambrose Bierce
nl:Ambrose Bierce
ja:
pl:Ambrose Bierce
pt:Ambrose Bierce
ru: ,
th:
thumb right Alexis Carrel
'''Alexis Carrel''' (June 28 1873 November 5 1944) was a French surgeon and biologist. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1912. Born and educated in Lyon, France. He practiced in France and the United States (University of Chicago and the Rockefeller Institute). He developed new techniques in vascular sutures and was a pioneer in transplantology and thoracic surgery. He was a member of learned societies in the United States of America, Spain, Russia, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Vatican City, Germany, Italy and Greece and received honorary doctorates from the Universities of Belfast, Princeton, California, New York, Brown and Columbia.
Contributions to science
On January 17, 1912 he placed a part of chicken's embryo heart in fresh nutrient medium in a stoppered Pyrex flask of his design. Every forty eight hours the tissue doubled in size and was transferred to a new flask. The tissue was still growing 20 years later, longer than life of the chicken itself.
Carrel was honored in 1912 with a Nobel prize in medicine in recognition of his work on vascular suture and the transplantation of blood vessels and organs.
During the First World War, Carrel and the English chemist, Henry Drysdale Dakin, developed the Carrel Dakin method of treating wounds with sutures, which prior to the development of widespread antibiotics, was responsible for saving many lives. For this, Carrel was awarded the L gion d'honneur.
He co authored a book with Charles A. Lindbergh, ''The Culture of Organs'', and worked with Lindbergh in the mid 1930s to create the "perfusion pump," which allowed living organs to exist outside of the body during surgery. The advance is said to have been a crucial step in the development of open heart surgery and organ transplants, and to have laid the groundwork for the artificial heart, which became a reality decades later. Some critics of Lindbergh claimed that Carrel overstated Lindbergh's role to gain media attention. (Wallace, ''American Axis'' p. 101). Both Lindbergh and Carrel appeared on the cover of Time magazine on June 13, 1938.
In 1972, the Swedish Post Office honored Carrel with a stamp that was part of its Nobel stamp series. In 1979, the lunar crater Carrel was named after him as a tribute to his scientific breakthroughs.
Relation to eugenics and fascism
In 1935, Carrel published a best selling book titled ''L'Homme, cet inconnu '' (''Man The Unknown'') which advocated, in part, that mankind could better itself by following the guidance of an elite group intellectuals, and by implementing a regime of enforced eugenics. Roger Callois, writing in ''The Edge of Surrealism'', quotes and paraphrases ''L'Homme, cet inconnu '' as follows: " '(p)resent day proletarians owe their status to inherited intellectual and physical defects' (sancta simplicitas). And he suggests that this state of affairs should be accenetuated through appropriate measures, so as to correlate social and biological inequalities more precisely. Society would then be directed by a hereditary aristocracy composed of descendants from the Crusaders, the heroes of the Revolution, the great criminals, the financial and industrial magnates" (p. 360).
Carrel advocated the use of gas chambers to rid humanity of inferior stock. His endorsement of this idea began in the mid 1930's, prior to Nazi implementation of such practices. In the 1936 German introduction of his book, at the publishers request, he added the following praise of the Nazi regime which did not appear in the editions in other languages: "(t)he German government has taken energetic measures against the propagation of the defective, the mentally diseased, and the criminal. The ideal solution would be the suppression of each of these individuals as soon as he has proven himself to be dangerous." (quoted in Reggiani, p. 339). He also wrote: "(t)he conditioning of petty criminals with the whip, or some more scientific procedure, followed by a short stay in hospital, would probably suffice to insure order. Those who have murdered, robbed while armed with automatic pistol or machine gun, kidnapped children, despoiled the poor of their savings, misled the public in important matters, should be humanely and economically disposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gasses. A similar treatment could be advantageously applied to the insane, guilty of criminal acts." (quoted in Szasz)
In 1937, Carrel joined Jean Coutrot s Centre d Etudes des Probl mes Humains. (Coutrot s aim was to develop what he called an economic humanism through "collective thinking.") In 1941, through connections to the Petain cabinet (specifically, French industrial physicians Andr Gros and Jacques M n trier) he went on to advocate for the creation of Fondation Fran aise pour l Etude des Probl mes Humains (French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems) which was created by decree of the collaborationist Vichy regime in 1941, and where he served as 'regent' (see Andr s Horacio Reggiani, ''Alexis Carrel, the Unknown: Eugenics and Population Research under Vichy'', as well as Callois, p. 107). "The foundation was chartered as a public institution under the joint supervision of the ministries of finance and public health. It was given financial autonomy and a budget of forty million francs roughly one franc per inhabitant a true luxury considering the burdens imposed by the German Occupation on the nation s resources. By way of comparison, the whole Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) was given a budget of fifty million francs." (Reggiani) "The foundation was a puridisciplinary centre that employed around 300 researchers (mainly statisticians, psychologists, physicians) from the summer of 1942 to the end of the autumn of 1944. After the liberation of Paris, Carrel was suspended by the Minister of Health he died in November 1944, but the Foundation itself was "purged", only to reappear in a short time as the Institut national d tudes d mographiques (INED) that is still active." Scholars including Lucien Bonnaf , Patrick Tort and Max Lafont have accused Carrel of responsibility for the execution of thousands of mentally ill or impaired patients under Vichy. They argue that this policy was inspired by Carrel's advocacy. Other scholars state that Carrel merely provided intellectual cover for policies that would have been undertaken with or without his advocacy. All this eventually led many in France to accuse him of collaboration with the Nazis.
This association with Vichy, and the harshness of his advocacy for eugenics, has led to his descent from fame to obscurity. In recent years, Jean Marie le Pen, the French neo fascist politician, has become an advocate for Carrel, referring to him as "the first environmentalist, or, if you will, the first modern ecologist, precisely because he committed himself to defining the relationships of natural harmony." (le Pen, L'Espoir 133 134, cited in Golson, Fascism's Return). His writings on eugenics are studied "avidly in the training camps of the National Front". (Lucien Bonnaf and Patrick Tort, ''L'Homme, cet inconnu? Alexis Carrel, Jean Marie le Pen et les chambres a gaz'' )
In the 1990's, the attention the National Front's support brought to Carrel's fascist associations and advocacy for forced euthenasia created a series of controversies with respect to streets and institutions named in honor of Carrel. Over 20 French cities and towns, including Paris, renamed streets previously named for Carrel. The controvery came to a head in Lyon, his birhtplace, where a medical school was named in his honor. Lyon lib ration questioned the wisdom of this. In response to this, "(i)n May 1995, the Palais des Congr s of Lyon hosted a conference on Carrel and scientific racism at which several of the participants accused the inquiry commission of whitewashing the controversial scientist. In early 1996, after five years of embarrassing publicity, the governing board of the University of Lyon decided to rename its school of medicine after Ren La nnec, inventor of the stethoscope."
In the United States as well as France, the 1990's were not kind to Carrel's reputation. In an interview for PBS' The American Experience, historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. blamed Carrel for Charles Lindbergh's increasing racism in the 1930's. Schlesinger states in response to a question concerning the source of Lindbergh's beliefs on this subject: "I suppose he got a lot of it from Alexis Carrel, the French biologist who had a kind of racial mysticism of a sort."
Alleged influence on the rise of Islamism
Carrel's eugenic ideas are alleged by some scholars to have had "superficial commonalities" with the thought of such early advocates of Islamism as Ali Shariati and Muslim Brotherhood propagandist Sayyed Qutb. Qutb, in fact, cites Carrel more than any other author. (Qutb was one of the key philosophers in the Muslim Brotherhood movement after the death of its founder in 1949 and Qutb's brother was bin Laden's intellectual mentor at King Abdul Aziz University in Jeddah, along with Abdullah Azzam). (For more on the Carrel Islamist connection, see Tariq Ali, ''Clash of Fundamentalisms'', p. 274 Youssef Choueiri, ''Islamic Fundamentalism'' (London 1990) and Rudolph Walther, ''Die seltsamen Lehren des Doktor Carrel'', DIE ZEIT 31.07.2003 Nr.32)
Tariq Ali, Youssef Choueiri, Abu Rabi, and Aziz Al Azmeh, as well as other scholars of Islamism, see Carrel as a primary (if unwitting) influence on the origin of Islamism. Quoting from Rudolf Walther's article in ''Die Zeit'': "(t)he superficial commonalities between Carrel and Qutb are plain: we meet the medical man's elite in a "scientific monastery" as Qutb's "avant garde," and the Carrel's "biological classes" are Qutb's "belief classes." Whether "civilization" (Carrel) or "barbarism" (Qutb) neither are "worthy of us," because they contradict "our true nature" (Carrel) or Qutb's "good, healthy nature." Both are in agreement in their goal to reconcile knowledge and belief.
Qutb follows Carrel in making "human nature" the condition and measure of all thought and action. Because "human nature" is simultaneously posited as God given, both immunize "human nature" against criticism, because God answers queries as little as "nature" does objections. The core of Qutb's supposed Middle Eastern Islamism is formed by a naturalistic logical error that is deeply rooted in European philosophy... Carrel writes: "The goal of life is to follow the laws of life. We decipher these laws from our bodies and our souls, not from philosophical systems and concepts." Thus ethical norms ("laws of life") are derived directly from biological facts and psychological diagnoses. Translated to Qutb's language, human freedom and thus a free, varied society are not possible, only obedience to the law of God. ...
What Qutb calls "the Islamic method," the integration of education, ethics, economics and politics to a unified system of "divine uniqueness," matches Carrel's "unification of all capabilities and their coordination to a single belief," the "super science" in every detail ..."
This influence is ironic, given that Carrel himself was a devoted Roman Catholic and Christian mystic. He mentions Islam in ''Man, the Unknown'' just once, and not in a complimentary manner. He notes of European Christian civilization, that, "(a)t the cost of immense efforts, we succeeded in thrusting back the sleep of Islamism." Throughout his book, he refers to European civilization as "Christendom." Moreover, he believed in the racial superiority of northern Europeans. These ideas would have been anathema to Qutb.
External links
Sources
Carrel, Alexis. ''Man, The Unknown.'' New York and London: Harper and Brothers. 1935.
Andr s Horacio Reggiani. ''Alexis Carrel, the Unknown: Eugenics and Population Research under Vichy'' (FRENCH HISTORICAL STUDIES 25:2 SPRING 2002)
Wallace, Max. ''The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and the Rise of the Third Reich'' St. Martin's Press, New York, 2003.
Szasz, TS. ''The Theology of Medicine'' New York: Syracuse University Press, 1977.
Ali, Tariq. ''Clash of Fundamentalisms'' Verso, London, 2002
Choueiri, Youssef. ''Islamic Fundamentalism'' Continuum International Publishing Group, London, 2002.
Walther, Rudolph. ''Die seltsamen Lehren des Doktor Carrel'', DIE ZEIT 31.07.2003 Nr.32
Bonnaf , Lucien and Tort, Patrick. ''L'Homme, cet inconnu? Alexis Carrel, Jean Marie le Pen et les chambres a gaz'' Editions Syllepse, 1996.
Abu Rabi, Ibrahim M. ''Intellectual Origins of Islamic Resurgence'', SUNY Press, Albany, 1996
Azmeh, Aziz (Aziz Al Azmeh). ''Islams and Modernities'' Verso, London, 1993.
Berman, Paul. ''Terror and Liberalism'' W. W. Norton, 2003
Mairowitz, David Zane. "Fascism a la mode: in France, the far right presses for national purity." Harper's Magazine 10 1 1997
Pioneers of Islamic Revival (edited by Ali Rahnema), Zed Books, London 1994
Schneider, William. Quality and Quantity: The Quest for Biological Regeneration in Twentieth Century France, Cambridge Studies in the History of Medicine (chap. 7 French eugenics in the thirties and 10 Vichy and after)
Terrenoire, Par Gwen, CNRS. ''Eugenics in France (1913 1941) : a review of research findings'' Joint Programmatic Commission UNESCO ONG Science and Ethics, March 24, 2003
Carrel, Alexis
Carrel, Alexis
Carrel, Alexis
Carrel
Carrel
de:Alexis Carrel
es:Alexis Carrel
fr:Alexis Carrel
id:Alexis Carrel
ja:
pl:Alexis Carrel
pt:Alexis Carrel
fi:Alexis Carrel
tr:Alexis Carrel
Infobox BPM
name The Rt. Hon. Sir Anthony Eden, Earl of Avon
image Eden.jpg
kingdom the United Kingdom
term 7 April 1955 9 January 1957
before Sir Winston Churchill
after Harold Macmillan
date birth 12 June 1897
place birth Bishop Auckland, Durham
date death 14 January 1977
place death Alvediston, Salisbury, Wiltshire
party Conservative
'''Robert Anthony Eden, 1st Earl of Avon''', KG, MC, PC (June 12, 1897 January 14, 1977), British politician, was Foreign Secretary during World War II and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom during the 1950s. He is remembered mainly for his role in the disastrous Suez Crisis of 1956. In a 2004 poll Winston Churchill came top, Eden bottom.
Early career
Eden was born in Durham, into a very conservative landowner family. His mother, Sybil Grey, was a member of the famous Grey family of Northumberland (see below). He studied at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated in oriental languages. (He was fluent in French, German and Persian. He also spoke Russian and Arabic). Following a military career during the First World War, during which he received a Military Cross, Eden entered politics in 1923 when he was elected Member of Parliament for Warwick and Leamington, as a Conservative. In that year also he married Beatrice Beckett. They had two sons, but the marriage was not a success and broke up under the strain of Eden's political career.
Eden became Parliamentary Private Secretary at the Foreign Office in 1926. In 1931 he was promoted to Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs. In 1934 he was appointed Lord Privy Seal and Minister for the League of Nations in Stanley Baldwin's Government. Like many of his generation who had served in the First World War, Eden was strongly anti war and strove to work through the League of Nations to preserve European peace. He was however among the first to recognise that peace could not be maintained by appeasement of Nazi Germany and fascist Italy. He privately opposed the policy of the Foreign Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, of trying to appease Italy during its invasion of Abyssinia (Ethiopia) in 1935. When Hoare resigned after the failure of the Hoare Laval Pact, Eden succeeded him as Foreign Secretary.
At this stage in his career Eden was considered as something of a leader of fashion. He regularly wore a Homburg hat (similar to a bowler hat but with an upturned brim), which became forever known in Britain by his name.
He had an elder brother called Timothy and a younger brother, Nicholas, who had been killed when the Indefatigable had been sunk at the Battle of Jutland in 1916.
Foreign Secretary
Eden became Foreign Secretary at a time when Britain was having to adjust its foreign policy to face the rise of the fascist powers. He supported the policy of non interference in the Spanish Civil War, and supported Neville Chamberlain in his efforts to preserve peace through reasonable concessions to Germany. He did not protest when Britain and France failed to oppose Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland in 1936. But in February 1938, he resigned because he could not accept Chamberlain's opening of negotiations with Italy. This made him an ally of Winston Churchill, then a rebel backbench Conservative MP and leading critic of appeasement. There was much speculation that Eden would become a rallying point for all the disparate opponents of Chamberlain, but instead he maintained a low profile, avoiding confrontation though he opposed the Munich Agreement. As a result Eden's position declined heavily amongst politicians, though he remained popular in the country at large.
In September 1939, on the outbreak of war, Eden returned to Chamberlain's government as Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs, but was not in the War Cabinet. As a result he was not considered a candidate for the Premiership when Chamberlain resigned after Germany invaded France in May 1940 and Churchill became Prime Minister. He appointed Eden Secretary of State for War. Later in 1940 he returned to the Foreign Office, and in this role became a member of the executive committee of the Political Warfare Executive in 1941. Although he was one of Churchill's closest confidents, his role in wartime was restricted because Churchill conducted the most important negotiations, with Franklin D. Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin, himself, but Eden served loyally as Churchill's lieutenant. Nevertheless he was in charge of handling much of the relations between Britain and de Gaulle during the last years of the war. In 1942 he was given the additional job of Leader of the House of Commons.
After the Labour Party won the 1945 elections, Eden went into opposition as Deputy Leader of the Conservative Party. Many felt that Churchill should have retired and allowed Eden to become party leader, but Churchill refused to consider this and Eden was too loyal to press him. He was in any case depressed during this period by the break up of his first marriage and the death of his eldest son, Simon Eden, in the last days of the war.
In 1951, the Conservatives returned to office and Eden became Foreign Secretary for a third time. Churchill was largely a figurehead in this government and Eden had effective control of British foreign policy for the first time, as the Cold War grew more intense. He dealt effectively with the various crises of the period, although Britain was no longer the world power it had been before the war. In 1950 he and Beatrice Eden were finally divorced and in 1952 he married Churchill's niece, Lady Clarissa Spencer Churchill (b. 1920) a nominal Roman Catholic who was fiercely criticized by Catholic writer Evelyn Waugh for marrying a divorced man a marriage much more successful than his first had been. In 1953 Eden underwent a series of operations at Boston's Lahey Clinic to correct a minor gall bladder complaint. Unfortunately Eden's health never fully recovered this was to undermine his subsequent career. In 1954 he was made a Knight of the Garter.
Prime Minister
In April 1955 Churchill finally retired, and Sir Anthony succeeded him as Prime Minister. Eden was a very popular figure, as a result of his long wartime service and also his famous good looks and charm. On taking office he immediately called a general election, at which the Conservatives were returned with an increased majority. But Sir Anthony had never held a domestic portfolio and had little experience in economic matters. He left these areas to his lieutenants such as Rab Butler, and concentrated largely on foreign policy, forming a close alliance with U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower. His famous words "Peace comes first, always" added to his already substantial popularity.
This alliance proved illusory, however, when in 1956 Sir Anthony, in conjunction with France, tried to prevent Gamal Abdel Nasser, President of Egypt, nationalising the Suez Canal, which had been owned since the 19th century by British and French shareholders in the Suez Canal Company. Sir Anthony, drawing on his experience in the 1930s, saw Nasser as another Mussolini. Sir Anthony considered the two men aggressive nationalist socialists determined to invade other countries. Others believed that Nasser was acting from legitimate patriotic concerns.
In October 1956, after months of negotiation and attempts at mediation had failed to dissuade Nasser, Britain and France, in conjunction with Israel, invaded Egypt and occupied the Suez Canal Zone. But Eisenhower immediately and strongly opposed the invasion. The U.S. President was an advocate of decolonisation, because it would liberate colonies, strengthen U.S. interests, and presumably make other Arab and African leaders more sympathetic to the United States. Eden had ignored Britain's financial dependence on the U.S. in the wake of World War II, and was forced to bow to American pressure to withdraw. The Suez Crisis is widely taken as marking the end of Britain (along with France) as a World power.
The Suez fiasco ruined Sir Anthony's reputation for statesmanship and led to a breakdown in his health. His Chancellor, Harold Macmillan, despite having been one of the architects of Suez, manoeuvred Eden into resignation and succeeded him as Prime Minister in January 1957. Eden retained his personal popularity and was made '''Earl of Avon''' in 1961.
Retirement
In retirement he lived quietly in Wiltshire with his second wife, and published a highly acclaimed personal memoir, ''Another World'', as well as several volumes of political memoirs. On a trip to the United States in 1977 his health rapidly deteriorated. At his request, James Callaghan sent the RAF to fly him home to die. The Earl of Avon died from liver cancer in Salisbury in 1977 at the age of 79.
From 1945 1973, Eden was Chancellor of the University of Birmingham, England. He was recently voted the least effective British Prime Minister of the twentieth century by a BBC poll, which was topped by rival Clement Attlee.
Eden's surviving son, Nicholas Eden (1930 1985), known as Viscount Eden until 1977, was also a politician and was a minister in the Thatcher government until his premature death from AIDS at the age of 54.
The Papers of Eden are housed at the University of Birmingham Special Collections.
The Eden Government
Anthony Eden: Prime Minister
Lord Kilmuir: Lord Chancellor
Lord Salisbury: Lord President of the Council
Harry Crookshank: Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Commons
Rab Butler: Chancellor of the Exchequer
Harold Macmillan: Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
Gwilym Lloyd George: Secretary of State for the Home Department
Alan Lennox Boyd: Secretary of State for the Colonies
Lord Home: Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations
Peter Thorneycroft: President of the Board of Trade
Lord Woolton: Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Sir David Eccles: Minister of Education
James Stuart: Secretary of State for Scotland
Derick Heathcoat Amory: Minister of Agriculture
Sir Walter Turner Monckton: Minister of Labour and National Service
Selwyn Lloyd: Minister of Defence
Duncan Sandys: Minister of Housing and Local Government
Osbert Peake: Minister of Pensions and National Insurance
'''Changes'''br
December 1955 Rab Butler succeeds Harry Crookshank as Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Commons. Harold Macmillan succeeds Butler as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Selwyn Lloyd succeeds Macmillan as Foreign Secretary. Sir Walter Monckton succeeds Lloyd as Minister of Defence. Iain Macleod succeeds Monckton as Minister of Labour and National Service. Lord Selkirk succeeds Lord Woolton as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. The Minister of Public Works, Patrick Buchan Hepburn, enters the Cabinet. The Minister of Pensions and National Insurance leaves the Cabinet upon Peake's retirement.
October 1956: Sir Walter Monckton becomes Paymaster General. Anthony Henry Head succeeds Monckton as Minister of Defence.
The Grey Eden connection
Charles Grey, 1st Earl Grey Elizabeth Grey
Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey William Grey
Prime Minister Maria Shireff
Georgina Plowden Sir William Grey
Sir William Eden Sybil Grey
'''Anthony Eden'''
Prime Minister
External links
http: www.discoverychannel.co.uk alteredstatesmen feature3.shtml
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
Avon
de:Anthony Eden
es:Anthony Eden
fr:Anthony Eden
it:Anthony Eden
nl:Anthony Eden
ja:
pl:Anthony Eden
pt:Anthony Eden
fi:Anthony Eden
sv:Anthony Eden
'''All Souls' Day''' (formally, ''Commemoratio omnium Fidelium Defunctorum'' or Commemoration of all the Faithful Departed), also called '''Defuncts' Day''' in Mexico and Belgium, is the day set apart in the Roman Catholic Church for the commemoration of the faithful departed. The celebration is based on the doctrine that the souls of the faithful which at death have not been cleansed from venial sins, or have not atoned for past transgressions, cannot attain the beatific vision, and that they may be helped to do so by prayer and by the sacrifice of the mass.
The feast falls on November 2. Traditionally, because Requiem Masses could not be celebrated on Sundays before Vatican II, the feast was transferred to November 3 if November 2 is a Sunday, but this is no longer observed in the Novus Ordo.
Christian origin
The practice of setting apart a special day for intercession for certain of the faithful departed is very old. But the first feast of general intercession was first established by Odilo, abbot of Cluny (d. 1048). The legend is given by Peter Damiani in his ''Life of St Odilo.'' According to this, a pilgrim returning from the Holy Land was cast by a storm on a desolate island. A hermit living there told him that amid the rocks was a chasm communicating with purgatory, from which perpetually rose the groans of tortured souls. The hermit also claimed he had heard the demons complaining of the efficacy of the prayers of the faithful, and especially the monks of Cluny, in rescuing their victims. Upon returning home, the pilgrim hastened to inform the abbot of Cluny, who then set 2 November as a day of intercession on the part of his community for all the souls in purgatory. The decree ordaining the celebration is printed in the Bollandist Acta Sanctorum (Saec. VI, pt. i. p. 585). From Cluny the custom spread to the other houses of the Cluniac order, was soon adopted in several dioceses in France, and spread throughout the Western Church. In time the entire month of November became associated with prayer for the departed in the Western Catholic tradition. Nonetheless the 2 November retained a special status as a day set apart for that purpose.
Protestantism
At the Reformation the celebration of All Souls' Day was abolished in the Church of England, though it was renewed in certain churches in connection with the "Catholic revival" of the 19th century. The observance was restored with the publication of the 1980 Alternative Service Book, and it features in Common Worship.
Among continental Protestants its tradition has been more tenaciously maintained. Even Luther's influence was not sufficient to abolish its celebration in Saxony during his lifetime and, though its Ecclesiastical sanction soon lapsed even in the Lutheran Church, its memory survives strong in popular custom. Just as it is the custom of French people, of all ranks and creeds, to decorate the graves of their dead on the ''jour des morts'', so German people stream to the graveyards once a year with offerings of flowers.
Pagan roots
Certain popular beliefs connected with All Souls' Day are of pagan origin and immemorial antiquity. Thus the dead are believed by the peasantry of many Catholic countries to return to their former homes on All Souls' Night and partake of the food of the living. In Tyrol, cakes are left for them on the table and the room kept warm for their comfort. In Brittany, people flock to the cemeteries at nightfall to kneel bare headed at the graves of their loved ones, and to toll the hollow of the tombstone with holy water or to pour libations of milk on it, and at bedtime the supper is left on the table for the souls. This tradition, though, certainly does not make Catholicism a pagan religion at all since it is the first Christian Church and denomination for over a 1,000 years.
See also
Office of the Dead
Samhain
Halloween
Day of the Dead
Zaduszki
External links
Category:Liturgical Calendar
de:Allerseelen
ja:
la:Commemoratio Omnium Fidelium Defunctorum
nl:Allerzielen
pt:Dia dos fi is defuntos
'''Anatole France''' (April 16, 1844 October 12, 1924) was the pen name of French author '''Jacques Anatole Fran ois Thibault'''. He was born in Paris, France, and died in Tours, Indre et Loire, France. In addition to being a celebrated author, Anatole was also documented to have a brain volume just two thirds the normal size.
In 1896, he was made a member of the Acad mie fran aise.
In the 1920s France's writings were put on the Index of Forbidden Books of the Roman Catholic Church. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1921.
Works, partial list
''Penguin Island'', ''L' le des Pingouins''
''The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard'', ''Le Crime de Sylvester Bonnard''
''Tha s''
''The Human Tragedy'', ''L'Humaine Tragedie''
''The Queen Pedauque'', ''La Rotisserie de la Reine Pedauque''
''The Red Lily'', ''Le Lys Rouge''
''The Revolt of the Angels'', ''La Revolte des Anges''
''Crainquebille Putois Riquet et Plusieurs Autres Recits Profitables''
''Les Sept Femmes de la Barbe Bleue et Autres Contes Merveilleux''
''Monsieur Bergeret a Paris''
''Sur la Pierre Blanche''
''The Man Who Married A Dumb Wife'' play
''The Gods Will Have Blood The Gods Are A Thirst''
''The Life of Joan of Arc'' 2 volumes
''Mother of Pearl''
Famous sayings
"The law, in its majestic equality, forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal bread."
"I prefer the errors of enthusiasm to the indifference of wisdom."
"If fifty million people say a foolish thing, it is still a foolish thing."
"When a thing has been said, and said well, have no scruple. Take it and copy it."
"Let us give to men irony and pity as witnesses and judges."
"Make hatred hated."
"Never lend books, for no one ever returns them the only books I have in my library are those that other people have lent me."
"To accomplish great things, we must not only act, but also dream not only plan, but also believe."
"Without the utopians of other times, men would still live in caves, miserable and naked ...utopia is the principle of all progress, adn the essay into a better world."
External links
succession box before Ferdinand de Lesseps title Seat 38brAcad mie fran aise years 18961924 after Paul Val ry
succession box before Knut Hamsun title Nobel Prize in Literature winner years 1921 after Jacinto Benavente
France, Anatole
France, Anatole
France, Anatole
France, Anatole
France, Anatole
France, Anatole
bg:
be:
de:Anatole France
et:Anatole France
es:Anatole France
eo:Anatole FRANCE
fr:Anatole France
hr:Anatole France
it:Anatole France
he:
nl:Anatole France
no:Anatole France
ja:
pl:Anatole France
pt:Anatole France
ru: ,
sk:Anatole France
fi:Anatole France
sv:Anatole France
'''Andr Paul Guillaume Gide''' (November 22, 1869 February 19, 1951) was a French author and winner of the Nobel prize in literature in 1947. Gide's career spanned from the symbolist movement to the advent of anticolonialism in between the two World Wars.
Gide's work can be seen as an investigation of freedom and empowerment in the face of moralistic and puritan constraints, and gravitates around his continuous effort to achieve intellectual honesty. His self exploratory texts reflect his search of how to be fully oneself, even to the point of owning one's sexual nature, without at the same time betraying one's values. His political activity is informed by the same ethos, as suggested by his repudiation of communism after his 1936 voyage to the USSR.
Known for his fiction as well as his autobiographical works, Gide exposes to public view the conflict and eventual reconciliation between the two sides of his personality, split apart by a straightlaced education and a narrow social moralism as he perceives himself: the austere and refined Protestant, and the divinely inspired and no longer blushing pederast.
Early life
Gide was born in Paris, France on November 22, 1869. His father was a Paris University professor of law and died 1880. His uncle was the political economist Charles Gide.
Gide was brought up in isolated conditions in Normandy and became a prolific writer at an early age, publishing in 1891 his first novel, ''The Notebooks of Andre Walter'' (French: ''Les Cahiers d'Andr Walter'').
In 1893 and 1894 Gide traveled in northern Africa. He befriended Oscar Wilde in Algiers and there clearly recognized his own pederastic orientation:
:"But how can I describe my delirium at holding in my naked arms that perfect, savage little brown body, eager, lacivious? I spent a long time, after Mohammed had left me, in a state of trembling exaltation, and although I had reached the peak of pleasure five times with him, I re lived my ecstasy again and again, and back at my room at the hotel prolonged the memories until dawn. At the first pale light I got up and ran, yes really ran, in sandals, far beyond Mustapha a kind of lightness of the body and soul did not leave me all day." (''Si Le Grain Ne Meurt'').
Though sympathetic to the plight of homosexuals in his day, he never saw himself as one of them, claiming that, "I was never homosexual, in the sense of finding men attractive."
The middle years
In 1895, after his mother's death, he married his cousin Madeleine Rondeaux but the marriage remained unconsummated. In 1896 he was mayor of La Roque Baignard, a commune in Normandy.
In 1908 Gide helped found the literary magazine ''Nouvelle Revue fran aise'' (''The New French Review''). In 1916 Marc All gret, 16, becomes his lover. He was the son of Elie Allegret, best man at Gide's wedding. Of Allegret's five children, Andre Gide adopted Marc. The two elope to London, in retribution for which his wife burns all his correspondence, "the best part of myself," as he was later to comment. In 1918 he met Dorothy Bussy, who was his friend for over thirty years and who would translate all his works into English.
In the 1920s Gide became an inspiration for writers like Albert Camus and Jean Paul Sartre. In 1923 he published a book on Fyodor Dostoyevsky however, when he defended homosexuality in the public edition of ''Corydon'' (1924) he received widespread condemnation. He later considered this his most important work.
In 1923 he conceived a daughter named Catherine with another woman, Elisabeth van Rysselberghe, daughter of his friend, the Belgian neo impressionist painter Th o van Rysselberghe. His wife Madeleine died in 1938. Later he used the background of his unconsummated marriage in his novel ''Et Nunc Manet in Te.'' The novel included passages about ponies and bananas. These works were unconventional at the time, and became instant classics (1951).
After 1925 he began to demand more humane conditions for criminals. In 1926 he published an autobiography, ''If it die'' (French: ''Si le grain ne meurt'').
Africa
From July 1926 to May 1927, he travelled through the French Equatorial Africa colony with his lover Marc All gret. He went successively in Middle Congo (now the Republic of the Congo), in Oubangui Chari (now the Central African Republic), briefly in Chad and then in Cameroun before returning to France. He related his peregrinations in a journal called ''Travels in the Congo'' (French: ''Voyage au Congo'') and ''Return from Chad'' (French: ''Retour du Tchad''). In this published journal, he criticized the behavior of French business interests in the Congo and inspired reform. In particular, he strongly criticized the ''Large Concessions'' regime (French: ''r gime des Grandes Concessions''), i.e. a regime according to which part of the colony was conceded to French companies and where these companies could exploit all area's natural resources, in particular rubber. He related for instance how natives were forced to leave their village during several weeks to collect rubber in the forest, and went as far as comparing their exploitation to slavery.
Russia
During the 1930s he briefly became a communist, but became disillusioned after his visit to Soviet Union. His criticism of communism caused him to lose many of his socialist friends, especially when he made a clean break with it in ''Retour de L'U.R.S.S.'' in 1936. He was also a contributor to ''The God That Failed''.
The 1940s
Gide left France for Africa in 1942 and lived in Tunis until the end of World War II. In 1947, he received the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Gide died on February 19, 1951.
Partial list of works
''Les cahiers d'Andr Walter'' 1891
''Le trait du Narcisse'' 1891
''Les po sies d'Andr Walter'' 1892
''Le voyage d'Urien'' 1893
''La tentative amoureuse'' 1893
''Paludes'' 1895
''R flexions sur quelques points de litt rature'' 1897
''Les nourritures terrestres'' 1897
''Feuilles de route 1895 1896'' 1897
''El Hadj''
''Le Prom th e mal encha n '' 1899
''Philoct te'' 1899
''Lettres Ang le'' 1900
''De l'influence en litt rature'' 1900
''Le roi Candaule'' 1901
''Les limites de l'art'' 1901
''L'immoraliste'' 1902
''Sa l'' 1903
''De l'importance du public'' 1903
''Pr textes'' 1903
''Amyntas'' 1906
''Le retour de l'enfant prodigue'' 1907
''Dosto evsky d'apr s sa correspondance'' 1908
''La porte troite'' 1909
''Oscar Wilde'' 1910
''Nouveaux pr textes'' 1911
''Charles Louis Philippe'' 1911
''C. R. D. N.'' 1911
''Isabelle'' 1911
''Bethsab '' 1912
''Souvenirs de la Cour d'Assises'' 1914
''Les caves du Vatican'' 1914
''La symphonie pastorale'' 1919
''Corydon'' 1920
''Numquid et tu . . .?'' 1922
''Dosto evsky'' 1923
''Incidences'' 1924
''Caract res'' 1925
''Les faux monnayeurs'' 1925
''Si le grain ne meurt'' 1926
''Le journal des faux monnayeurs'' 1926
''Dindiki'' 1927
''Voyage au Congo'' 1927
''Le retour de Tchad'' 1928
''L' cole des femmes'' 1929
''Essai sur Montaigne'' 1929
''Un esprit non pr venu'' 1929
''Robert'' 1930
''La s questr e de Poitiers'' 1930
''L'affaire Redureau'' 1930
'' dipe'' 1931
''Pers phone'' 1934
''Les nouvelles nourritures'' 1935
''Genevi ve'' 1936
''Retour de l'U. R. S. S.'' 1936
''Retouches mon retour de l'U. R. S. S.'' 1937
''Notes sur Chopin'' 1938
''Journal 1889 1939'' 1939
''D couvrons Henri Michaux'' 1941
''Th s e'' 1946
''Le retour'' 1946
''Paul Val ry'' 1947
''Le proc s'' 1947
''L'arbitraire'' 1947
''Eloges'' 1948
''Litt rature engag e'' 1950
The Catholic Church placed his works on the Index of Forbidden Books in 1952.
See also
Historical pederastic couples
External links
''In French''
succession box before Hermann Hesse title Nobel Prize in Literature winner years 1947 after Thomas Stearns Eliot
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
Gide, Andr
cs:Andr Gide
de:Andr Gide
et:Andr Gide
es:Andr Gide
eo:Andr GIDE
fa:
fr:Andr Gide
hr:Andr Gide
it:Andr Gide
he: '
hu:Andr Gide
ja:
no:Andr Gide
pl:Andr Gide
pt:Andr Gide
ru: ,
fi:Andr Gide
sv:Andr Gide
tr:Andr Gide
zh:
'''Applied statistics''' is the use of statistics and statistical theory in real life situations.
Anyone committed to empirical observation as a means of knowing the universe about us can apply statistics as a research tool. This obviously includes science but includes history and the arts as well. For example, econometrics makes heavy use of applied statistics to study the economy.
In each of these areas, we need to observe, recognize the potential for error in our observations, and plan our research to control the observational error.
See also
Important publications in applied statistics
External links
Category:Statistics
pl:statystyka stosowana
'''Algorithms for calculating variance''' play a minor role in statistical computing. A key problem in the design of good algorithms for this problem is that formulas for the variance may involve sums of squares, which can lead to numerical instability as well as to arithmetic overflow when dealing with large values.
Algorithm I
A formula for calculating the variance of a population of size ''n'' is:
:math sigma 2 frac sum i 1 n x i 2 ( sum i 1 n x i) 2 n n . ! math
A formula for calculating an unbiased estimate of the population variance from a finite sample of ''n'' observations is:
:maths 2 frac sum i 1 n x i 2 ( sum i 1 n x i) 2 n n 1 . ! math
Therefore a naive algorithm to calculate the estimated variance is given by the following pseudocode:
long n 0
double sum 0
double sum sqr 0
foreach x in data:
n 1
sum x
sum sqr x x
end for
double mean sum n
double variance (sum sqr sum mean) (n 1)
This algorithm can easily be adapted to compute the variance of a finite population: simply divide by ''n'' instead of mathn 1 math on the last line.
Algorithm II
The following formulas can be used to update the mean and (estimated) variance of the sequence, for an additional element mathx mathrm new math. Here, ''m'' denotes the estimate of the population mean, ''s''sup2 sup the estimate of the population variance, and ''n'' the number of elements in the sequence before the addition.
:mathm mathrm new frac n m mathrm old x mathrm new n 1 m mathrm old frac x mathrm new m mathrm old n 1 ! math
:maths 2 mathrm new frac (n 1) s 2 mathrm old (x mathrm new m mathrm new ) , (x mathrm new m mathrm old ) n ! math
A numerically stable algorithm is given below. It also computes the mean.
This algorithm is due to KnuthrefDonald E. Knuth (1998). ''The Art of Computer Programming'', volume 2: ''Seminumerical Algorithms'', 3rd edn., p. 232. Boston: Addison Wesley. ref,
who cites WelfordrefB. P. Welford (1962). "Note on a method for calculating corrected sums of squares and products". ''Technometrics'' 4(3):419 420. ref.
long n 0
double mean 0
double S 0
foreach x in data:
n 1
double delta x mean
mean delta n
S delta (x mean) This expression uses the new value of mean
end for
double variance S (n 1)
Example
Assume that all floating point operations use the standard IEEE 754 double precision arithmetic. Consider the sample (4, 7, 13, 16) from an infinite population. Based on this sample, the estimated population mean is 10, and the estimated population variance is 30. Both algorithms compute these values correctly. Next consider the sample math(10 8 4, 10 8 7, 10 8 13, 10 8 16) math, which gives rise to the same estimated variance as the first sample. Algorithm II computes this variance estimate correctly, but Algorithm I returns 29.333333333333332 instead of 30. While this loss of precision may be tolerable and viewed as a minor flaw of Algorithm I, it is easy to find data that reveal a major flaw in the naive algorithm: Take the sample to be math(10 9 4, 10 9 7, 10 9 13, 10 9 16) math. Again the estimated population variance of 30 is computed correctly by Algorithm II, but the naive algorithm now computes it as 170.66666666666666. This is a serious problem with Algorithm I, since the variance can, by definition, never be negative.
References
references
External links
Category:Statistics
Taxobox
color lightgreen
name Almond
image Almond blossoms branch.JPG
image width 250px
image caption Almond flowers
regnum Plantae
divisio Magnoliophyta
classis Magnoliopsida
ordo Rosales
familia Rosaceae
subfamilia Prunoideae
genus Prunus
species '''''P. dulcis'''''
binomial ''Prunus dulcis''
binomial authority (Mill.) D. A. Webb
The '''Almond''' (''Prunus dulcis'', syn. ''Prunus amygdalus'', or ''Amygdalus communis'') is a small deciduous tree belonging to the subfamily Prunoideae of the family Rosaceae. An ''almond'' is also the fruit of this tree. It is classified with the peach in the subgenus ''Amygdalus'' within ''Prunus'', distinguished from the other subgenera by the corrugated seed shell.
The fruit lacks the sweet fleshy outer covering of other members of ''Prunus'' (such as the plum and cherry), this being replaced by a leathery coat, called a hull, which contains the edible kernel, commonly called a nut, inside a hard shell. In botanical parlance, the reticulated hard stony shell is called an endocarp, and the fruit, or exocarp, is a drupe, having a downy outer coat.
The tree is probably a native of southwest Asia and north Africa, but has been so extensively cultivated for so long over the warm temperate regions of the Old World that its original natural distribution is obscure. It can ripen fruit as far north as the British Isles. It is a tree of moderate size the leaves are lanceolate, and serrated at the edges and it flowers early in spring.
Production
Global production of almonds is around 1.5 million tonnes, with a low of 1 million tonnes in 1995 and a peak of 1.85 million tonnes in 2002 . Major producers include Greece, Iran, Italy, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Syria, Turkey, and the United States. In Spain, numerous commercial cultivars of sweet almond are produced, most notably the Jordan almond (imported from M laga) and the Valencia almond. In the United States, production is concentrated in California, with almonds being California's sixth leading argicultrual product and its top agricultural export. California exported almonds valued at 1.08 billion dollars in 2003, about 70 of total California almond crop.
Pollination
ImageStackRight 200
thumb right Almond flowers
The pollination of California's almonds is the largest annual managed pollination event in the world, with close to one million hives (nearly half of all beehives in the USA) being trucked in February to the almond groves. Much of the pollination is managed by pollination brokers, who contract with migratory beekeepers from at least 38 states for the event.
Sweet and bitter almond
There are two forms of the plant, one (often with white flowers) producing sweet almonds, and the other (often with pink flowers) producing bitter almonds. The kernel of the former contains a fixed oil and emulsion. As late as the early 20th century the oil was used internally in medicine, with the stipulation that it must not be adulterated with that of the bitter almond it remains fairly popular in alternative medicine, particularly as a carrier oil in aromatherapy, but has fallen out of prescription among doctors.
The bitter almond is rather broader and shorter than the sweet almond, and contains about 50 of the fixed oil which also occurs in sweet almonds. It also contains a ferment emulsion which, in the presence of water, acts on a soluble glucoside, amygdalin, yielding glucose, cyanide and the essential oil of bitter almonds or benzaldehyde. Bitter almonds may yield from 6 to 8 of prussic acid (also known as hydrogen cyanide). Extract of bitter almond was once used medicinally but even in small doses effects are severe and in larger doses can be deadly the prussic acid must be removed before consumption.
Almond oil
"Oleum Amygdalae", the fixed oil, is prepared from either variety of almond and is a glyceryl oleate, with slight odour and a nutty taste. It is almost insoluble in alcohol but readily soluble in chloroform or ether. It may be used as a substitute for olive oil.
The sweet almond oil is obtained from the dried kernel of the plant. This oil has been traditionally used by massage therapists to lubricate the skin during a massage session, being considered by many to be an effective emollient.
Culinary uses
While the almond is most often eaten raw, it is used in some dishes. It, along with other nuts, is often sprinkled over desserts, particularly sundaes and other ice cream based dishes. It is also used in Baklava. There is also almond butter, a spread similar to peanut butter, popular with peanut allergy sufferers and for its less salty taste.
The sweet almond itself contains practically no starch and may therefore be made into flour for cakes and biscuits for patients suffering from diabetes mellitus or any other form of glycosuria. Almond extract is also a popular substitute for vanilla extract among people with diabetes. Sweet almonds are used in marzipan, nougat, and macaroons, as well as other desserts. Almonds are a rich source of Vitamin E, containing 24 mg per 100 grammes . They are also rich in monounsaturated fat, one of the two "good" fats responsible for lowering LDL cholesterol.
In China, almonds are used in a popular dessert when it is mixed with milk and then served hot.
Cultural aspects
The almond is highly revered in some cultures. Among the Hebrews, it was a symbol of watchfulness and promise due to its early flowering, while the Chinese consider it a symbol of enduring sadness and female beauty. In India, consumption of almonds is considered to be good for the brain. Christian symbolism often uses almond branches as a symbol of the Virgin Birth of Jesus paintings often include almonds encircling the baby Jesus and as a symbol of Mary. In the Bible (Numbers 17) Aaron is chosen among the other tribes of Israel by a rod that brought forth almond flowers. Today, Jews still carry rods of almond blossom to the synagogues on great festival days. The fruit of the almond supplied a model for certain kinds of ornamental carved work (Exodus 25:33 34 37:19 20). In a similar legend, Pope Urban once declared that a man named Tannh user would not receive forgiveness until his wooden staff bloomed again. This occurred after three days, but Tannhauser could not be found. The nut of the tree has also been used as a preventative for alcohol intoxication. Folklore claims that almonds are poisonous for foxes. The tree grows in Syria and Israel, and is referred to in the Bible under the name of "Shaked", meaning "hasten". The word "Luz", which occurs in Genisis 30:37, and which some translations have as "hazel", is supposed to be another name for the almond. In Israel the tree flowers in January. The application of "Shaked" or "hasten" to the almond is similar to the use of the name "May" for the hawthorn, which usually flowers in that month in Britain.
Etymology
The word 'almond' comes from the Old French ''almande'' or ''alemande'', late Latin ''amandola'', derived through a form ''amingdola'' from the Greek ''amugdale'', an almond the al for a may be due to a confusion with the Arabic article ''al'', the word having first dropped the a as in the Italian form ''mandorla'' the British pronunciation ''ar mond'' and the modern French ''amande'' show the true form of the word.
In parts of Northern California, where almonds are a main crop, the word is often pronounced with a unique regional accent. Rather than the usual American pronunciation of "Ahl mond", with the soft A and L, it is pronounced with a hard A and nearly silent H, as in "Aah men . This method of pronunciation is particularly prevalent near the city of Chico in Butte County, but it is also heard in nearby Glenn, Colusa, and Tehama Counties.
See also
Almond milk, a milky drink made from ground almonds, similar to soy milk
Almond Joy, a candy bar
Fruit trees
Fruit tree forms
Pruning fruit trees
Fruit tree propagation
List of edible seeds
External links
Category:Rosaceae
Category:Nuts and seeds
Category:Pollination management
be:
ca:Ametller
co:Amandula
cy:Cneuen almon
da:Mandel
de:Mandel
es:Prunus dulcis
fr:Amandier
gl:Amendoeira
he:
nl:Amandel
ja:
pl:Migda owiec zwyczajny
pt:Amendoeira
ru:
sr:
fi:Manteli
'''Antigua and Barbuda's economy''' is service based, with tourism and government services representing the key sources of employment and income. Tourism accounts directly or indirectly for more than half of GDP and is also the principal earner of foreign exchange in Antigua and Barbuda. However, a series of violent hurricanes since 1995 resulted in serious damage to tourist infrastructure and periods of sharp reductions in visitor numbers. In 1999 the budding offshore financial sector was seriously hurt by financial sanctions imposed by the United States and United Kingdom as a result of the loosening of its money laundering controls. The government has made efforts to comply with international demands in order to get the sanctions lifted. The dual island nation's agricultural production is mainly directed to the domestic market the sector is constrained by the limited water supply and labor shortages that reflect the pull of higher wages in tourism and construction. Manufacturing comprises enclave type assembly for export with major products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components. Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialized world, especially in the US, which accounts for about one third of all tourist arrivals. Estimated overall economic growth for 2000 was 2.5 . Inflation has trended down going from above 2 percent in the 1995 99 period and estimated at 0 percent in 2000.
To lessen its vulnerability to natural disasters, Antigua has been diversifying its economy. Transportation, communications and financial services are becoming important.
Antigua is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) issues a common currency (the East Caribbean Dollar) for all members of the ECCU. The ECCB also manages monetary policy, and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in its member countries.
Antigua and Barbuda is a beneficiary of the U.S. Caribbean Basin Initiative. Its 1998 exports to the U.S. were valued at aboutUS 3 million and its U.S. imports totaled about US 84 million. It also belongs to the predominantly English speaking Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
'''GDP:'''
purchasing power parity 524 million (1999 est.)
'''GDP real growth rate:'''
2.8 (1999 est.)
'''GDP per capita:'''
purchasing power parity 8,200 (1999 est.)
'''GDP composition by sector:'''
br''agriculture:''
4
br''industry:''
12.5
br''services:''
83.5 (1996 est.)
'''Population below poverty line:'''
NA
'''Household income or consumption by percentage share:'''
br''lowest 10 :''
NA
br''highest 10 :''
NA
'''Inflation rate (consumer prices):'''
1.6 (1999 est.)
'''Labor force:'''
30,000
'''Labor force by occupation:'''
commerce and services 82 , agriculture 11 , industry 7 (1983)
'''Unemployment rate:'''
7 (1999 est.)
'''Budget:'''
br''revenues:''
122.6 million
br''expenditures:''
141.2 million, including capital expenditures of 17.3 million (1997 est.)
'''Industries:'''
tourism, construction, light manufacturing (clothing, alcohol, household appliances)
'''Industrial production growth rate:'''
6 (1997 est.)
'''Electricity production:'''
90 GWh (1998)
'''Electricity production by source:'''
br''fossil fuel:''
100
br''hydro:''
0
br''nuclear:''
0
br''other:''
0 (1998)
'''Electricity consumption:'''
84 GWh (1998)
'''Electricity exports:'''
0 kWh (1998)
'''Electricity imports:'''
0 kWh (1998)
'''Agriculture products:'''
cotton, fruits, vegetables, bananas, coconuts, cucumbers, mangoes, sugarcane livestock
'''Exports:'''
38 million (1998)
'''Exports commodities:'''
petroleum products 48 , manufactures 23 , food and live animals 4 , machinery and transport equipment 17
'''Exports partners:'''
OECS 26 , Barbados 15 , Guyana 4 , Trinidad and Tobago 2 , US 0.3
'''Imports:'''
330 million (1998)
'''Imports commodities:'''
food and live animals, machinery and transport equipment, manufactures, chemicals, Petroleum
'''Imports partners:'''
US 27 , UK 16 , Canada 4 , OECS 3
'''Debt external:'''
357 million (1998)
'''Economic aid recipient:'''
2.3 million (1995)
'''Currency:'''
1 East Caribbean dollar (EC ) 100 cents
'''Exchange rates:'''
East Caribbean dollars (EC ) per US 1 2.7000 (fixed rate since 1976)
'''Fiscal year:'''
1 April 31 March
References
Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda
fr: conomie d'Antigua et Barbuda
he:
pt:Economia da Ant gua e Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda maintains diplomatic relations with the United States, Canada the United Kingdom, and the People's Republic of China, as well as with many Latin American countries and neighboring Eastern Caribbean states. It is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organization of American States, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System (RSS).
As a member of CARICOM, Antigua and Barbuda supported efforts by the United States to implement UN Security Council Resolution 940, designed to facilitate the departure of Haiti's de facto authorities from power. The country agreed to contribute personnel to the multinational force which restored the democratically elected government of Haiti in October 1994.
In May 1997, Prime Minister Bird joined 14 other Caribbean leaders and President Clinton for the first ever U.S. regional summit in Bridgetown, Barbados. The summit strengthened the basis for regional cooperation on justice and counter narcotics issues, finance and development, and trade.
'''Disputes international:'''
none
'''Illicit drugs:'''
considered a minor transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US and Europe more significant as a drug money laundering center
Reference
''Much of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2000 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website.''
Category:Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda
! NOTE. Please first read the section Etymology and usage below if you intend to insert corrections
'': 1937 German poster. In his hands are "Zuckerbrot und Peitsche", or "cookies and knout", an allusion to a saying similar to that of "carrot and stick".
'''Anti Semitism''' (alternatively spelled '''antisemitism''') is hostility toward or prejudice against Jews as a religious, ethnic, or racial group, which can range from individual hatred to institutionalized, violent persecution. The highly explicit ideology of Adolf Hitler's Nazism was the most extreme example of this phenomenon, leading to a genocide of the European Jewry. Anti Semitism has historically taken different forms:
Religious anti Semitism, or anti Judaism. Before the 19th century, most anti Semitism was primarily religious in nature, based on Christian or Islamic interactions with and interpretations of Judaism. Since Judaism was generally the largest minority religion in Christian Europe and much of the Islamic world, Jews were often the primary targets of religiously motivated violence and persecution from Christian, and to a lesser degree, Islamic rulers. Unlike anti Semitism in general, this form of prejudice is directed at the religion itself, and so generally does not affect those of Jewish ancestry who have converted to another religion, although the case of Conversos in Spain was a notable exception. Laws banning Jewish religious practices may be rooted in religious anti Semitism, as were the expulsions of the Jews that happened throughout the Middle Ages.
Racial anti Semitism. With its origins in the anthropological ideas of race that started during the Enlightenment, racial anti Semitism became the dominant form of anti Semitism from the late 19th century through today. Racial anti Semitism replaced the hatred of Judaism as a religion with the idea that the Jews themselves were a racially distinct group, regardless of their religious practice, and that they were inferior or worthy of animosity. With the rise of racial anti Semitism, conspiracy theories about Jewish plots in which Jews were somehow acting in concert to dominate the world became a popular form of anti Semitic expression.
Some analysts and Jewish groups believe that there is a distinctly new form of late 20th century anti Semitism, often called new anti Semitism, which borrows language and concepts from anti Zionism, but which attacks Jews as a group, rather than Zionism as a movement. A second group of observers controversially identify anti Zionism itself with anti Semitism, arguing that anti Zionism, "advocates denial of the right to self determination of the Jewish people" (Matas 2005, p. 31).
Etymology and usage
The word ''antisemitic'' ('''' in German) was probably first used in 1860 by the Jewish scholar Moritz Steinschneider in the phrase "antisemitic prejudices" (). Steinschneider used this phrase to characterize Ernest Renan's ideas about how "Semitic races" were inferior to "Aryan races." These pseudo scientific theories had become quite widespread in Europe in the second half of the 19th century, especially as Prussian nationalistic historian Heinrich von Treitschke did much to promote this form of racism. In Treitschke's writings ''Semitic'' was practically synonymous with ''Jewish''.
German political agitator Wilhelm Marr coined the related German word ''Antisemitismus'' in his book ''"The Way to Victory of Germanicism over Judaism"'' in 1879. Marr used the phrase to mean ''Jew hatred'' or ''Judenhass,'' and he used the new word ''antisemitism'' to make hatred of the Jews seem rational and sanctioned by scientific knowledge. Marr's book became very popular, and in the same year he founded the ''"League of Anti Semites"'' ("Antisemiten Liga"), the first German organization committed specifically to combatting the alleged threat to Germany posed by the Jews, and advocating their forced removal from the country.
So far as can be ascertained, the word was first widely printed in 1881, when Marr published ''"Zwanglose Antisemitische Hefte,"'' and Wilhelm Scherer used the term "Antisemiten" in the ''"Neue Freie Presse"'' of January. The related word ''semitism'' was coined around 1885. See also the coinage of the term "Palestinian" by Germans to refer to the nation or people known as Jews, as distinct from the religion of Judaism.
Despite the use of the prefix "anti," the terms ''Semitic'' and ''Anti Semitic'' are not antonyms. To avoid the confusion of the misnomer, many scholars on the subject (such as Emil Fackenheim of the Hebrew University) now favor the unhyphenated term ''antisemitism''. Yehuda Bauer articulated this view in his writings and lectures: (the term) "Antisemitism, especially in its hyphenated spelling, is inane nonsense, because there is no Semitism that you can be anti to." , also in his ''A History of the Holocaust'', p.52)
The term ''anti Semitism'' has historically referred to prejudice towards Jews alone, and this was the only use of this word for more than a century. It does not traditionally refer to prejudice toward other people who speak Semitic languages (e.g. Arabs or Syriacs). Bernard Lewis, Professor of Near Eastern Studies Emeritus at Princeton University, says that "Anti Semitism has never anywhere been concerned with anyone but Jews."
In recent decades some groups have argued that the term should be extended to include prejudice against Arabs, Anti Arabism, in the context of accusations of Arab anti Semitism further, some, including the Islamic Association of Palestine, have argued that this implies that Arabs can not, ''by definition'', be anti Semitic, despite the acknowledged high level of Arab anti Semitism. The argument for such extension comes out of the claim that since the Semitic language family includes Arabic, Hebrew and Aramaic languages, and the historical term "Semite" refers to all those who consider themselves descendants of the Biblical Shem, anti Semitism should be likewise inclusive. This usage is not generally accepted.
Definitions of the term
Though the general definition of anti Semitism is hostility or prejudice towards Jews, a number of authorities have developed more formal definitions. Holocaust scholar and City University of New York professor Helen Fein's definition has been particularly influential. She defines anti Semitism as "a persisting latent structure of hostile beliefs towards Jews as a collective manifested in individuals as attitudes, and in culture as myth, ideology, folklore and imagery, and in actions social or legal discrimination, political mobilisation against the Jews, and collective or state violence which results in and or is designed to distance, displace, or destroy Jews as Jews."
Professor Dietz Bering of the University of Cologne further expanded on Professor Fein's definition by describing the structure of anti Semitic beliefs. To anti Semites: "Jews are not only partially but totally bad by nature, that is, their bad traits are incorrigible. Because of this bad nature: (1) Jews have to be seen not as individuals but as a collective. (2) Jews remain essentially alien in the surrounding societies. (3) Jews bring disaster on their 'host societies' or on the whole world, they are doing it secretly, therefore the anti Semites feel obliged to unmask the conspiratorial, bad Jewish character."
There have been a number of efforts by international and governmental bodies to formally define anti Semitism. The United States Department of State defines anti Semitism in its 2005 Report on Global Anti Semitism as "hatred toward Jews individually and as a group that can be attributed to the Jewish religion and or ethnicity."
In 2005, the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC), a body of the European Union, developed a more detailed working definition: "Antisemitism is a certain perception of Jews, which may be expressed as hatred toward Jews. Rhetorical and physical manifestations of antisemitism are directed toward Jewish or non Jewish individuals and or their property, toward Jewish community institutions and religious facilities. In addition, such manifestations could also target the state of Israel, conceived as a Jewish collectivity. Antisemitism frequently charges Jews with conspiring to harm humanity, and it is often used to blame Jews for 'why things go wrong'."
The EUMC then listed "contemporary examples of anti Semitism in public life, the media, schools, the workplace, and in the religious sphere." These included: Making mendacious, dehumanizing, demonizing, or stereotypical allegations about Jews accusing Jews as a people of being responsible for real or imagined wrongdoing committed by a single Jewish person or group denying the Holocaust and accusing Jewish citizens of being more loyal to Israel, or to the alleged priorities of Jews worldwide, than to the interests of their own nations. The EUMC also discussed ways in which attacking Israel could be anti Semitic, depending on the context (see anti Zionism below).
Earliest Antisemitism
The earliest occurrence of antisemitism has been the subject of debate among scholars. Professor Peter Schafer of the Freie University of Berlin has argued that antisemitism was first spread by "the Greek retelling of ancient Egyptian prejudices". In view of the anti Jewish writings of the Egyptian priest Manetho, Schafer suggests that anti Semitism may have emerged "in Egypt alone". The hostility commonly faced by Jews in the Diaspora has been extensively described by John M. G. Barclay of the University of Durham. The ancient Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria described an attack on Jews in Alexandria in 38 CE in ''Flaccus'', in which thousands of Jews died. In the analysis of Pieter W. Van Der Horst, the cause of the violence in Alexandria was that Jews had been portrayed as misanthropes. Gideon Bohak has argued that early animosity against Jews was not anti Judaism unless it arose from attitudes held against Jews alone. Using this stricter definition, Bohak says that many Greeks had animosity toward any group they regarded as barbarians. The 150 BCE suppression of Jewish religious practice by use of deadly force against civilians, as recounted in 1 Maccabees, then qualifies as anti Judaism in a broader sense of the term than is used by Bohak. There are other examples of ancient animosity towards Jews that are not considered by all to fall within the definition of anti semitism.
Religious Antisemitism
Anti Judaism in the New Testament
The New Testament is a collection of 'books' written by various authors. Most of this collection was written by the end of the first century. The majority of the New Testament was written by Jews who became followers of Jesus, and all but two books (Luke and Acts) are traditionally attributed to such Jewish followers. Nevertheless, there are a number of passages in the New Testament that some see as anti Semitic, or have been used for anti Semitic purposes, most notably:
:Jesus speaking to a group of Pharisees: "''I know that you are descendants of Abraham yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you. I speak of what I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have heard from your father. They answered him, "Abraham is our father." Jesus said to them, "If you were Abraham's children, you would do what Abraham did. ... You are of your father the devil, and your will is to do your father's desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, and has nothing to do with the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks according to his own nature, for he is a liar and the father of lies. But, because I tell the truth, you do not believe me. Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me? He who is of God hears the words of God the reason why you do not hear them is you are not of God.''" (John 8:37 39, 44 47, RSV)
:Stephen speaking before a synagogue council just before his execution: "''You stiff necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers did, so do you. Which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? And they killed those who announced beforehand the coming of the Righteous One, whom you have now betrayed and murdered, you who received the law as delivered by angels and did not keep it.''" (Acts 7:51 53, RSV)
:"''Behold, I will make those of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews and are not, but lie behold, I will make them come and bow down before your feet, and learn that I have loved you.''" (Revelation 3:9, RSV).
Some biblical scholars point out that Jesus and Stephen are presented as Jews speaking to other Jews, and that their use of broad accusation against Israel is borrowed from Moses and the later Jewish prophets (e.g. Deut 9:13 14 31:27 29 32:5, 20 21 2 Kings 17:13 14 Is 1:4 Hos 1:9 10:9). Jesus once calls his own disciple Peter 'Satan' (Mk 8:33). Other scholars hold that verses like these reflect the Jewish Christian tensions that were emerging in the late first or early second century, and do not originate with Jesus. Today, nearly all Christian denominations de emphasize verses such as these, and reject their use and misuse by anti Semites.
Drawing from the Jewish prophet Jeremiah (Jer 31:31 34), the New Testament taught that with the death of Jesus a new covenant was established which rendered obsolete and in many respects superseded the first covenant established by Moses (Heb 8:7 13 Lk 22:20). Observance of the earlier covenant traditionally characterizes Judaism. This New Testament teaching, and later variations to it, are part of what is called supersessionism. However, the early Jewish followers of Jesus continued to practice circumcision and observe dietary laws, which is why the failure to observe these laws by the first Gentile Christians became a matter of controversy and dispute some years after Jesus' death (Acts 11:3 15:1ff 16:3).
The New Testament holds that Jesus' (Jewish) disciple Judas Iscariot (Mk 14:43 46), the Roman Governor Pontius Pilate along with Roman forces (Jn 19:11 Acts 4:27) and Jewish leaders and people of Jerusalem were (to varying degrees) responsible for the death of Jesus (Acts 13:27) Diaspora Jews are not blamed for events which were clearly outside their control.
After Jesus' death, the New Testament portrays the Jewish religious authorities in Jerusalem as hostile to Jesus' followers, and as occasionally using force against them. Stephen is executed by stoning (Acts 7:58). Before his conversion, Saul puts followers of Jesus in prison (Acts 8:3 Gal 1:13 14 1 Tim 1:13). After his conversion, Saul is whipped at various times by Jewish authorities (2 Cor 11:24), and is accused by Jewish authorities before Roman courts (e.g., Acts 25:6 7). However, opposition from Gentiles is also cited repeatedly (2 Cor 11:26 Acts 16:19ff 19:23ff). More generally, there are widespread references in the New Testament to suffering experienced by Jesus' followers at the hands of others (Rom 8:35 1 Cor 4:11ff Gal 3:4 2 Thess 1:5 Heb 10:32 1 Pet 4:16 Rev 20:4).
Early Christianity
A number of early and influential Church works such as the dialogues of Justin Martyr, the homilies of John Chrysostom, and the testimonies of church father Cyprian are strongly anti Jewish.
During a discussion on the celebration of Easter during the First Council of Nicaea in AD 325, Roman emperor Constantine blockquote ...it appeared an unworthy thing that in the celebration of this most holy feast we should follow the practice of the Jews, who have impiously defiled their hands with enormous sin, and are, therefore, deservedly afflicted with blindness of soul. (...) Let us then have nothing in common with the detestable Jewish crowd for we have received from our Saviour a different way. blockquote
Prejudice against Jews in the Roman Empire was formalized in 438, when the ''Code of Theodosius II'' established Roman Catholic Christianity as the only legal religion in the Roman Empire. The Justinian Code a century later stripped Jews of many of their rights, and Church councils throughout the sixth and seventh century, including the Council of Orleans, further enforced anti Jewish provisions. These restrictions began as early as 305, when, in Elvira, (now Granada), a Spanish town in Andalusia, the first known laws of any church council against Jews appeared. Christian women were forbidden to marry Jews unless the Jew first converted to Catholicism. Jews were forbidden to extend hospitality to Catholics. Jews could not keep Catholic Christian concubines and were forbidden to bless the fields of Catholics. In 589, in Catholic Spain, the Third Council of Toledo ordered that children born of marriage between Jews and Catholic be baptized by force. By the Twelfth Council of Toledo (681) a policy of forced conversion of all Jews was initiated (Liber Judicum, II.2 as given in Roth). Thousands fled, and thousands of others converted to Roman Catholicism.
Anti Semitism in the Middle Ages
, Pope Gregory IX ordered the Talmud burned (note a non heretical book floating above the fire). A 15th century painting by Pedro Berruguete.
In the Middle Ages a main justification of prejudice against Jews in Europe was religious. Though not part of Catholic dogma, many Christians, including members of the clergy, have held the Jewish people collectively responsible for killing Jesus (see Deicide), a practice originated by Melito of Sardis. As stated in the Boston College Guide to Passion Plays, "Over the course of time, Christians began to accept... that the Jewish people as a whole were responsible for killing Jesus. According to this interpretation, both the Jews present at Jesus death and the Jewish people collectively and for all time, have committed the sin of deicide, or God killing. For 1900 years of Christian Jewish history, the charge of deicide has led to hatred, violence against and murder of Jews in Europe and America." This accusation was repudiated in 1964, when the Catholic Church under Pope Paul VI issued the document Nostra Aetate as a part of Vatican II.
As the Black Death epidemics devastated Europe in the mid 14th century, rumors spread that Jews caused it by deliberately poisoning wells. Hundreds of Jewish communities were destroyed by violence.
"Never mind that Jews were not immune from the ravages of the plague they were tortured until they "confessed" to crimes that they could not possibly have committed. In one such case, a man named Agimet was ... coerced to say that Rabbi Peyret of Chambery (near Geneva) had ordered him to poison the wells in Venice, Toulouse, and elsewhere. In the aftermath of Agimet s "confession," the Jews of Strasbourg were burned alive on February 14, 1349. (Source: ''Jews: The Essence and Character of a People'' by Arthur Hertzberg and Aron Hirt Manheimer, p.84)
Among socio economic factors were restrictions by the authorities, local rulers and frequently church officials who closed many professions to the Jews, pushing them into marginal occupations considered socially inferior, such as local tax and rent collecting or moneylending, a necessary evil due to the increasing population and urbanization during the High Middle Ages. Catholic doctrine of the time held that moneylending for interest was a sin, and as such Jews tended to dominate this business. This provided support for claims that Jews are insolent, greedy, engaged in usury, and in itself contributed to a negative image. Natural tensions between creditors (typically Jews) and debtors (typically Christians) were added to social, political, religious and economic strains. Peasants who were forced to pay their taxes to Jews could personify them as the people taking their earnings while remaining loyal to the lords on whose behalf the Jews worked.
The demonizing of the Jews
From around the 12th century through the 19th there were Christians who believed that some (or all) Jews possessed magical powers some believed that they had gained these magical powers from making a deal with the devil. See also Judensau, Judeophobia.
Blood libels
''Main articles: blood libel, list of blood libels against Jews''
On many occasions, Jews were accused of a blood libel, the supposed drinking of blood of Christian children in mockery of the Christian Eucharist. According to the authors of these blood libels, the 'procedure' for the alleged sacrifice was something like this: a child who had not yet reached puberty was kidnapped and taken to a hidden place. The child would be tortured by Jews, and a crowd would gather at the place of execution (in some accounts the synagogue itself) and engage in a mock tribunal to try the child. The child would be presented to the tribunal naked and tied and eventually be condemned to death. In the end, the child would be crowned with thorns and tied or nailed to a wooden cross. The cross would be raised, and the blood dripping from the child's wounds would be caught in bowls or glasses. Finally, the child would be killed with a thrust through the heart from a spear, sword, or dagger. Its dead body would be removed from the cross and concealed or disposed of, but in some instances rituals of black magic would be performed on it. This method, with some variations, can be found in all the alleged Christian descriptions of ritual murder by Jews.
The story of William of Norwich (d. 1144) is the first known case of ritual murder being alleged by a Christian monk while the story of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln (d. 1255) said that after the boy was dead, his body was removed from the cross and laid on a table. His belly was cut open and his entrails removed for some occult purpose, such as a divination ritual. The story of Simon of Trent (d. 1475) emphasized how the boy was held over a large bowl so all his blood could be collected. Simon was regarded as a saint, and was canonized by Pope Sixtus V in 1588. The cult of Simon was disbanded in 1965 by Pope Paul VI, and the shrine erected to him was dismantled. He was removed from the calendar, and his future veneration was forbidden, though a handful of extremists still promote the narrative as a fact. In the 20th century, the Beilis Trial in Russia and the Kielce pogrom represented incidents of blood libel in Europe, while more recently blood libel stories have appeared a number of times in the state sponsored media of a number of Arab nations, in Arab television shows, and on websites.
Host desecration
Jews were falsely accused of torturing consecrated host wafers in a reenactment of the Crucifixion this accusation was known as ''host desecration''.
Disabilities and Restrictions
Jews were subject to a wide range of legal restrictions throughout the Middle Ages, some of which lasted until the end of the 19th century. Jews were excluded from many trades, the list of excluded occupations varying in different communities, and being determined largely by the political influence of various non Jewish competing interests. Frequently all occupations were barred against Jews, except money lending and peddling even these at times being prohibited. The number of Jews or Jewish families permitted to reside in different places was limited they were concentrated in ghettos, and were not allowed to own land and they were subjected to discriminatory taxes on entering cities or districts other than their own, forced to swear special Jewish Oaths, and a variety of other measures, including restrictions on dress.
Clothing
''Main article: yellow badge, Judenhut''
The Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 was the first to proclaim the requirement for Jews to wear something that distinguished them as Jews. It could be a colored piece of cloth in the shape of a star or circle or square, a hat (Judenhut), or a robe. In many localities, members of the medieval society wore badges to distinguish their social status. Some badges (such as guild members) were prestigious, while others ostracized outcasts such as lepers, reformed heretics and prostitutes. Jews sought to evade the badges by paying what amounted to bribes in the form of temporary "exemptions" to kings, which were revoked and re paid whenever the king needed to raise funds.
The Crusades
The '''Crusades''' were a series of several military campaigns sanctioned by the Papacy that took place during the 11th through 13th centuries. They began as Catholic endeavors to capture Jerusalem from the Muslims but developed into territorial wars.
The mobs accompanying the first three Crusades attacked the Jewish communities in Germany, France, and England, and put many Jews to death. Entire communities, like those of Treves, Speyer, Worms, Mayence, and Cologne, were slain during the first Crusade by a mob army. About 12,000 Jews are said to have perished in the Rhenish cities alone between May and July, 1096. Before the Crusades the Jews had practically a monopoly of trade in Eastern products, but the closer connection between Europe and the East brought about by the Crusades raised up a class of merchant traders among the Christians, and from this time onward restrictions on the sale of goods by Jews became frequent. The religious zeal fomented by the Crusades at times burned as fiercely against the Jews as against the Muslims, though attempts were made by bishops during the First crusade and the papacy during the Second Crusade to stop Jews from being attacked. Both economically and socially the Crusades were disastrous for European Jews. They prepared the way for the anti Jewish legislation of Pope Innocent III, and formed the turning point in the medieval history of the Jews.
Image:FirstCrusade.jpg thumb left 1250 French Bible illustration depicts Jews (identifiable
by Judenhut) being massacred by Crusaders
The expulsions from England, France, Germany, and Spain
''Only a few expulsions of the Jews are described in this section, for a more extended list see History of anti Semitism, and also the History of the Jews in England, Germany, Spain, and France.''
The practice of expelling the Jews accompanied by confiscation of their property, followed by temporary readmissions for ransom, was utilized to enrich the French crown during 12th 14th centuries. The most notable such expulsions were: from Paris by Philip Augustus in 1182, from the entirety of France by Louis IX in 1254, by Charles IV in 1322, by Charles V in 1359, by Charles VI in 1394.
To finance his war to conquer Wales, Edward I of England taxed the Jewish moneylenders. When the Jews could no longer pay, they were accused of disloyalty. Already restricted to a limited number of occupations, the Jews saw Edward abolish their "privilege" to lend money, choke their movements and activities and were forced to wear a yellow patch. The heads of Jewish households were then arrested, over 300 of them taken to the Tower of London and executed, while others killed in their homes. The complete banishment of all Jews from the country in 1290 led to thousands killed and drowned while fleeing and the absence of Jews from England for three and a half centuries, until 1655, when Oliver Cromwell reversed the policy.
In 1492, Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella of Castile issued ''General Edict on the Expulsion of the Jews'' from Spain (''see also Spanish Inquisition'') and many Sephardi Jews fled to the Ottoman Empire, some to the Land of Israel.
In 1744, Frederick II of Prussia limited Breslau to only ten so called "protected" Jewish families and encouraged similar practice in other Prussian cities. In 1750 he issued ''Revidiertes General Privilegium und Reglement vor die Judenschaft'': the "protected" Jews had an alternative to "either abstain from marriage or leave Berlin" (quoting Simon Dubnow). In the same year, Archduchess of Austria Maria Theresa ordered Jews out of Bohemia but soon reversed her position, on condition that Jews pay for readmission every ten years. This extortion was known as ''malke geld'' (queen's money). In 1752 she introduced the law limiting each Jewish family to one son. In 1782, Joseph II abolished most of persecution practices in his ''Toleranzpatent'', on the condition that Yiddish and Hebrew are eliminated from public records and judicial autonomy is annulled. Moses Mendelssohn wrote that "Such a tolerance... is even more dangerous play in tolerance than open persecution".
Anti Judaism and the Reformation
Martin Luther, an Augustinian monk and an ecclesiastical reformer whose teachings inspired the Reformation, wrote antagonistically about Jews in his book ''On the Jews and their Lies'', which describes the Jews in extremely harsh terms, excoriating them, and providing detailed recommendation for a pogrom against them and their permanent oppression and or expulsion. According to Paul Johnson, it "may be termed the first work of modern anti Semitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the Holocaust." (''A History of the Jews'', 1987, p.242)
In his final sermon shortly before his death, however, Luther preached "We want to treat them with Christian love and to pray for them, so that they might become converted and would receive the Lord" (Weimar edition, Vol. 51, p. 195). Still, Luther's harsh comments about the Jews are seen by many as a continuation of medieval Christian anti Semitism.
''See also Martin Luther and Antisemitism''
Anti Semitism in 19th and 20th century Catholicism
Throughout the 19th century and into the 20th, the Catholic Church still incorporated strong anti Semitic elements, despite increasing attempts to separate anti Judaism, the opposition to the Jewish religion on religious grounds, and racial anti Semitism. Pope Pius VII (1800 1823) had the walls of the Jewish Ghetto in Rome rebuilt after the Jews were released by Napoleon, and Jews were restricted to the Ghetto through the end of the papacy of Pope Pius IX (1846 1878), the last Pope to rule Rome. Additionally, official organizations such as the Jesuits banned candidates "who are descended from the Jewish race unless it is clear that their father, grandfather, and great grandfather have belonged to the Catholic Church" until 1946. Brown University historian David Kertzer, working from the Vatican archive, has further argued in his book ''The Popes Against the Jews'' that in the 19th and 20th century the Roman Catholic Church adhered to a distinction between "good anti Semitism" and "bad anti Semitism". The "bad" kind promoted hatred of Jews because of their descent. This was considered un Christian because the Christian message was intended for all of humanity regardless of ethnicity anyone could become a Christian. The "good" kind criticized alleged Jewish conspiracies to control newspapers, banks, and other institutions, to care only about accumulation of wealth, etc. Many Catholic bishops wrote articles criticizing Jews on such grounds, and, when accused of promoting hatred of Jews, would remind people that they condemned the "bad" kind of anti Semitism. Kertzer's work is not, therefore, without critics scholar of Jewish Christian relations Rabbi David G. Dalin, for example, criticized Kertzer in the Weekly Standard for using evidence selectively. The Second Vatican Council, the Nostra Aetate document, and the efforts of Pope John Paul II have helped reconcile Jews and Catholicism in recent decades, however.
Passion plays
Passion plays, dramatic stagings representing the trial and death of Jesus, have historically been used in remembrance of Jesus' death during Lent. These plays historically blamed the Jews for the death of Jesus in a polemical fashion, depicting a crowd of Jewish people condemning Jesus to crucifixion and a Jewish leader assuming eternal collective guilt for the crowd for the murder of Jesus, which, ''The Boston Globe'' explains, "for centuries prompted vicious attacks or pogroms on Europe's Jewish communities".'' explains that "such passages (are) highly subject to interpretation". Although modern scholars interpret the "blood on our children" (Matthew 27: 25) as "a specific group's oath of responsibility" some audiences have historically interpreted it as "an assumption of eternal, racial guilt". This last interpretation has often incited violence against Jews according to the Anti Defamation League, "Passion plays historically unleashed the torrents of hatred aimed at the Jews, who always were depicted as being in partnership with the devil and the reason for Jesus' death".'' explains that " h istorically, productions have reflected negative images of Jews and the long time church teaching that the Jewish people were collectively responsible for Jesus' death. Violence against Jews as 'Christ killers' often flared in their wake." ''Christianity Today'' in '''' observed that "Outbreaks of Christian anti Semitism related to the Passion narrative have been...numerous and destructive."
In 2003 and 2004 some compared Mel Gibson's recent film ''The Passion of the Christ'' to these kinds of passion plays, but this characterization is hotly disputed an analysis of that topic is in the article on The Passion of the Christ. Despite such fears, there have been no publicized anti Semitic incidents directly attributable to the movie's influence.
Racial anti Semitism
Racial anti Semitism replaced the hatred of Judaism with the hatred of Jews as a group. In the context of the Industrial Revolution, following the emancipation of the Jews, Jews rapidly urbanized and experienced a period of greater social mobility. With the decreasing role of religion in public life tempering religious anti Semitism, a combination of growing nationalism, the rise of eugenics, and resentment at the socio economic success of the Jews led to the newer, and more virulent, racist anti Semitism.
Nationalism and Anti Semitism
Racial anti Semitism was preceded, especially in Germany, by anti Semitism arising from Romantic nationalism. As racial theories developed, especially from the mid nineteenth century onwards, these nationalist ideas were subsumed within them. But their origins were quite distinct from racialism. On the one hand they derived from an exclusivist interpretation of the 'Volk' ideas of Herder. This led to anti Semitic writing and journalism in the second quarter of the 19th century of which Richard Wagner's Das Judentum in der Musik (Jewry in Music) is perhaps the most notorious example. On the other hand, radical socialists such as Karl Marx identified Jews as being both victims and enforced perpetrators of the Capitalist system e.g. in his article 'On the Jewish Question'. From sources such as these, and encouraged by the broad acceptance of racial theories as the century continued, anti Semitism entered the vocabularies and policies of both the right and the left in political thought.
The rise of racial anti Semitism
Modern European anti Semitism has its origin in 19th century pseudo scientific theories that the Jewish people are a sub group of Semitic peoples Semitic people were thought by many Europeans to be entirely different from the Aryan, or Indo European, populations, and that they can never be amalgamated with them. In this view, Jews are not opposed on account of their religion, but on account of their supposed hereditary or genetic racial characteristics: greed, a special aptitude for money making, aversion to hard work, clannishness and obtrusiveness, lack of social tact, low cunning, and especially lack of patriotism.
While enlightened European intellectual society of that period viewed prejudice against people on account of their religion to be declass and a sign of ignorance, because of this supposed 'scientific' connection to genetics they felt fully justified in prejudice based on nationality or 'race'. In order to differentiate between the two practices, the term anti Semitism was developed to refer to this 'acceptable' bias against Jews as a nationality, as distinct from the 'undesirable' prejudice against Judaism as a religion. Concurrently with this usage, some authors in Germany began to use the term 'Palestinians' when referring to Jews as a people, rather than as a religious group.
As further proof of its pseudo scientific nature, it is questionable whether Jews in general looked significantly different from the populations conducting "racial" anti Semitism. This was especially true in places like Germany, France and Austria where the Jewish population tended to be more secular (or at least less Orthodox) than that of Eastern Europe, and did not wear clothing (such as a yarmulke) that would particularly distinguish their appearance from the non Jewish population. Many anthropologists of the time such as Franz Boas tried to use complex physical measurements like the cephalic index and visual surveys of hair eye color and skin tone of Jewish vs. non Jewish European populations to prove that the notion of a separate "Jewish race" was a myth. The 19th and early 20th century view of race should be distinguished from the efforts of modern population genetics to trace the ancestry of various Jewish groups, see Y chromosomal Aaron.
The advent of racial anti Semitism was also linked to the growing sense of nationalism in many countries. The nationalist context viewed Jews as a separate and often "alien" nation within the countries in which Jews resided, a prejudice exploited by the elites of many governments.
Elites and the use of Anti semitism
: "The Jews are a different race, hostile to our own... Judaism, there is the enemy!"
Many analysts of modern anti Semitism have pointed out that its essence is scapegoating: features of modernity felt by some group to be undesirable (e.g. materialism, the power of money, economic fluctuations, war, secularism, socialism, Communism, movements for racial equality, social welfare policies, etc.) are believed to be caused by the machinations of a conspiratorial people whose full loyalties are not to the national group. Traditionalists anguished at the supposedly decadent or defective nature of the modern world have sometimes been inclined to embrace such views. Indeed, it is a matter of historical record that many of the conservative members of the WASP establishment of the United States as well as other comparable Western elites (e.g. the British Foreign Office) have harbored such attitudes, and in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, some xenophobic anti Semites have imagined world Communism to be a Jewish conspiracy (''Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups'' 1980 , p. 590).
The modern form of anti Semitism is identified in the 1911 edition of the Encyclop dia Britannica as a conspiracy theory serving the self understanding of the European aristocracy, whose social power waned with the rise of bourgeois society. The Jews of Europe, then recently emancipated, were relatively literate, entrepreneurial and unentangled in aristocratic patronage systems, and were therefore disproportionately represented in the ascendant bourgeois class. As the aristocracy (and its hangers on) lost out to this new center of power in society, they found their scapegoat exemplified in the work of Arthur de Gobineau. That the Jews were singled out to embody the 'problem' was, by this theory, no more than a symptom of the nobility's own prejudices concerning the importance of breeding (on which its own legitimacy was founded).
Dreyfus Affair
demonstrated French anti semitism.
The Dreyfus affair was a political scandal which divided France for many years during the late 19th century. It centered on the 1894 treason conviction of Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish officer in the French army. Dreyfus was, in fact, innocent: the conviction rested on false documents, and when high ranking officers realized this they attempted to cover up the mistakes. The writer mile Zola exposed the affair to the general public in the literary newspaper ''L'Aurore'' (The Dawn) in a famous open letter to the Pr sident de la R publique F lix Faure, titled ''J'accuse !'' (I Accuse!) on January 13, 1898.
The Dreyfus Affair split France between the ''Dreyfusards'' (those supporting Alfred Dreyfus) and the ''Antidreyfusards'' (those against him). The quarrel was especially violent since it involved many issues then highly controversial in a heated political climate.
Dreyfus was pardoned in 1899, readmitted into the army, and made a knight in the Legion of Honour. An Austrian Jewish journalist named Theodor Herzl was assigned to report on the trial and its aftermath. The injustice of the trial and the anti Semitic passions it aroused in France and elsewhere turned him into a determined and leading Zionist ultimately turning the movement into an international one. Also see Alfred Dreyfus and Dreyfus affair.
Pogroms
in Dnipropetrovsk.
Pogroms were a form of race riots, most commonly Russia and Eastern Europe, aimed specifically at Jews and often government sponsored. Pogroms became endemic during a large scale wave of anti Jewish riots that swept southern Russia in 1881, after Jews were wrongly blamed for the assassination of Tsar Alexander II. In the 1881 outbreak, thousands of Jewish homes were destroyed, many families reduced to extremes of poverty women sexually assaulted, and large numbers of men, women, and children killed or injured in 166 Russian towns. The new czar, Alexander III, blamed the Jews for the riots and issued a series of harsh restrictions on Jews. Large numbers of pogroms continued until 1884, with at least tacit inactivity by the authorities. An even bloodier wave of pogroms broke out in 1903 1906, leaving an estimated 2,000 Jews dead, and many more wounded. A final large wave of 887 pogroms in Russia and Ukraine occurred during the Russian Revolution of 1917, in which between 70,000 to 250,000 civilian Jews were killed by riots led by various sides.
During the early to mid 1900s, pogroms also occurred in Poland, Argentina, and throughout the Arab world. Extremely deadly pogroms also occurred during World War II, including the Romanian Ia i pogrom in which 14,000 Jews were killed, and the Jedwabne massacre in Poland which killed between 380 and 1,600 Jews. The last mass pogrom in Europe was the post war Kielce pogrom of 1946.
Anti Jewish Legislation
of 1935 used a pseudo scientific basis for racial discrimination against Jews. People with four German grandparents (white circles) were of "German blood," while people were classified as Jews if they descended from three or more Jewish grandparents (black circles in top row right). One or more Jewish grandparents made someone "mixed blood." Since the racial differences between Jews and Germans are small, the Nazis used the religious observance of a person's grandparents to determine their "race." (1935 Chart from Nazi Germany used to explain the Nuremberg Laws)
Anti semitism was officially adopted by the German Conservative Party at the Tivoli Congress in 1892, on the instigation of Dr. Klasing but in the teeth of opposition led by the moderate Werner von Blumenthal.
Official anti Semitic legislation was enacted in various countries, especially in Imperial Russia in the 19th century and in Nazi Germany and its Central European allies in the 1930s. These laws were passed against Jews as a group, regardless of their religious affiliation in some cases, such as Nazi Germany, having a Jewish grandparent was enough to qualify someone as Jewish.
In Germany, for example, the Nuremberg Laws of 1935 prevented marriage between any Jew and non Jew, and made it that all Jews, even quarter and half Jews, were no longer citizens of their own country (their official title became "subject of the state"). This meant that they had no basic citizens' rights, e.g., to vote. In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them having any influence in education, politics, higher education and industry. On 15 November of 1938, Jewish children were banned from going to normal schools. By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government. This further reduced their rights as human beings they were in many ways officially separated from the German populace. Similar laws existed in Hungary, Romania, and Austria.
Even when anti Semitism was not an official state policy, governments in the early to middle parts of the 20th century often adopted more subtle measures aimed at Jews. For example, the Evian Conference of 1938 delegates from thirty two countries neither condemned Hitler's treatment of the Jews nor allowed more Jewish refugees to flee to the West.
The Holocaust and Holocaust Denial
Racial anti Semitism reached its most horrific manifestation in the Holocaust during World War II, in which about 6 million European Jews, 1.5 million of them children, were systematically murdered.
Holocaust deniers often claim that "the Jews" or "Zionist conspiracy" are responsible for the exaggeration or wholesale fabrication of the events of the Holocaust. Critics of such revisionism point to an overwhelming amount of physical and historical evidence that supports the mainstream historical view of the Holocaust. Almost all academics agree that there is no evidence for any such conspiracy.
Anti Semitic conspiracy theories
n edition of ''The Protocols of the Elders of Zion'' includes a "historical and contemporary investigative study" that repeats the blood libel and other anti Semitic accusations, and argues that the Torah and Talmud encourage Jews "to commit treason and to conspire, dominate, be arrogant and exploit other countries".
The rise of views of the Jews as a malevolent "race" generated anti Semitic conspiracy theories that the Jews, as a group, were plotting to control or otherwise influence the world. From the early infamous Russian literary hoax, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, published by the Tzar's secret police, a key element of anti Semitic thought has been that Jews influence or control the world.
In a recent incarnation, extremist groups, such as Neo Nazi parties and Islamist groups, claim that the aim of Zionism is global domination they call this the ''Zionist conspiracy'' and use it to support anti Semitism. This position is associated with fascism and Nazism, though increasingly, it is becoming a tendency within parts of the left as well.
Anti Semitism and the Muslim world
''Anti Semitism within Islam is discussed in the article on Islam and anti Semitism. Anti Semitism in the Arab World is discussed in the article on Arabs and anti Semitism''
The Qur'an, Islam's holy book, accuses the Jews of corrupting the Hebrew Bible. Muslims refer to Jews and Christians as a "People of the book" Islamic law demands that when under Muslim rule they should be treated as dhimmis from the Arab term ''ahl adh dhimma''. The writer Bat Ye'or introduced the modern word ''Dhimmitude'' as a generic indication of this Islamic attitude. Dhimmis were granted protection of life (including against other Muslim states), the right to residence, worship, and work or trade, and were exempted from military service, and Muslim religious duties, personal law and tax. They were obligated to pay other taxes (jizyah and land tax), and subject to various other restrictions regarding the contradiction of Islam, the Qur'an or Muhammad, proselytizing, and at times a number of other restrictions on dress, riding horses or camels, carrying arms, holding public office, building or repairing places of worship, mourning loudly, wearing shoes outside a Jewish ghetto, etc.
Anti Semitism in the Muslim world increased in the twentieth century, as anti Semitic motives and blood libels were imported from Europe and as resentment against Zionist efforts in British Mandate of Palestine spread. While anti Semitism has certainly been heightened by the Arab Israeli conflict, there were an increasing number of pogroms against Jews prior to the foundation of Israel, including Nazi inspired pogroms in Algeria in the 1930s, and massive attacks on the Jews in Iraq and Libya in the 1940s (see Farhud). George Gruen attributes the increased animosity towards Jews in the Arab world to several factors including: The breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society domination by Western colonial powers under which Jews gained a disproportionatly large role in the commercial, professional, and administrative life of the region the rise of Arab nationalism, whose proponents sought the wealth and positions of local Jews through government channels resentment over Jewish nationalism and the Zionist movement and the readiness of unpopular regimes to scapegoat local Jews for political purposes.
Anti Zionist propaganda in the Middle East frequently adopts the terminology and symbols of the Holocaust to demonize Israel and its leaders. At the same time, Holocaust denial and Holocaust minimization efforts have found increasingly overt acceptance as sanctioned historical discourse in a number of Middle Eastern countries.
Anti semitism and specific countries
United States
: Nazi salute and Holocaust denial
Jews were often condemned by populist politicians alternately for their left wing politics, or their perceived wealth, at the turn of the century. Anti semitism grew in the years leading up to America's entry into World War II, Father Charles Coughlin, an anti Semitic radio preacher, as well as many other prominent public figures, condemned "the Jews," and Henry Ford reprinted The Protocols of the Elders of Zion in his newspaper.
In 1939 a Roper poll found that only thirty nine percent of Americans felt that Jews should be treated like other people. Fifty three percent believed that "Jews are different and should be restricted" and ten percent believed that Jews should be deported.
It has been estimated that 190 000 200 000 Jews could have been saved during the Second World War had it not been
for bureaucratic obstacles to immigration deliberately created by Breckinridge Long and others.
Unofficial antisemitism was also widespread in the first half of the century. For example, to limit the growing number of Jewish students between 1919 1950s a number of private liberal arts universities and medical and dental schools employed Numerus clausus. These included Harvard University, Columbia University, Cornell University, and Boston University. In 1925 Yale University, which already had such admissions preferences as "character", "solidity", and "physical characteristics" added a program of legacy preference admission spots for children of Yale alumni, in an explicit attempt to put the brakes on the rising percentage of Jews in the student body. This was soon copied by other Ivy League and other schools, and admissions of Jews were kept down to 10 through the 1950s. Such policies were for the most part discarded during the early 1960s.
American anti Semitism underwent a modest revival in the late 20th century. The Nation of Islam under Louis Farrakhan claimed that Jews were responsible for slavery, economic exploitation of black labor, selling alcohol and drugs in their communities, and unfair domination of the economy. Jesse Jackson issued his infamous "Hymietown" remarks during the 1984 Presidential primary campaign.
According to ADL surveys begun in 1964, African Americans are "significantly more likely" than white Americans to hold anti Semitic beliefs, although there is a strong correlation between education level and the rejection of anti Semitic stereotypes. .
Europe
The summary of a 2004 poll by the ''Pew Global Attitudes Project'' noted that "Despite concerns about rising anti Semitism in Europe, there are no indications that anti Jewish sentiment has increased over the past decade. Favorable ratings of Jews are actually higher now in France, Germany and Russia than they were in 1991. Nonetheless, Jews are better liked in the U.S. than in Germany and Russia."
However, according to 2005 survey results by the ADL
The Vienna based European Union Monitoring Center (EUMC), for 2002 and 2003, identified France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and The Netherlands as EU member countries with notable increases in incidents. As these nations keep reliable and comprehensive statistics on anti Semitic acts, and are engaged in combating anti Semitism, their data was readily available to the EUMC. Governments and leading public figures condemned the violence, passed new legislation, and mounted positive law enforcement and educational efforts.
In Western Europe, traditional far right groups still account for a significant proportion of the attacks against Jews and Jewish properties disadvantaged and disaffected Muslim youths increasingly were responsible for most of the other incidents. In Eastern Europe, with a much smaller Muslim population, skinheads and others members of the radical political fringe were responsible for most anti Semitic incidents. Anti Semitism remained a serious problem in Russia and Belarus, and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, with most incidents carried out by ultra nationalist and other far right elements. The stereotype of Jews as manipulators of the global economy continues to provide fertile ground for anti Semitic aggression.
France
Anti semitism was particularly virulent in Vichy France during WWII (1939 1945). The Vichy government openly collaborated with the Nazi occupiers to identify Jews for deportation and transportation to the death camps.
Today, despite a steady trend of decreasing antisemitism among the population, as is tension between the Jewish and Muslim populations of France, both the largest in Europe. According to the National Advisory Committee on human rights, antisemitic acts account for a majority (72 of all in 2003) of racist acts in France. (''See also the official statement of the French ministry of interior about antisemitic acts''.)
In 2005 the Israeli newspaper the Maariv found that 82 of French people questioned had favourable attitudes towards Jews, the second highest percentage of the countries questioned. The Netherlands was highest at 85 .
Poland
''see History of the Jews in Poland''
In 1264, King Boleslaus V of Poland legislated a charter for Jewish residence and protection, hoping that Jewish settlement would contribute to the development of the Polish economy. This charter, which encouraged money lending, was a slight variation of the 1244 charter granted by the King of Austria to the Jews. By the sixteenth century, Poland had become the center of European Jewry and the most tolerant of all European countries regarding the matters of faith, although there were still occasionally violent anti Semitic incidents.
At the onset of the seventeenth century, however, the tolerance began to give way to increased anti Semitism. Elected to the Polish throne King Sigismund III of the Swedish House of Vasa, a strong supporter of the counter reformation, began to undermine the principles of the Warsaw Confederation and the religious tolerance in the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth, revoking and limiting privileges of all non Catholic faiths. In 1628 he banned publication of Hebrew books, including the Talmud . Acclaimed twentieth century historian Simon Dubnow, in his ''magnum opus'' ''History of the Jews in Poland and Russia'', detailed:
:"''At the end of the 16th century and thereafter, not one year passed without a blood libel trial against Jews in Poland, trials which always ended with the execution of Jewish victims in a heinous manner..."'' (ibid., volume 6, chapter 4).
In the 1650s the Swedish invasion of the Commonwealth (The Deluge) and the Chmielnicki Uprising of the Cossacks resulted in vast depopulation of the Commonwealth, as over 30 of the 10 million population has perished or emigrated. In the related 1648 55 pogroms led by the Ukrainian Haidamaks uprising against Polish nobility (szlachta), during which approximately 100,000 Jews were slaughtered, Polish and Ruthenian peasants often participated in killing Jews (''The Jews in Poland'', Ken Spiro, 2001). The besieged szlachta, who were also decimated in the territories where the uprising happened, typically abandoned the loyal peasantry, townsfolk, and the Jews renting their land, in violation of "rental" contracts.
In the aftermath of the Deluge and Chmielnicki Uprising, many Jews fled to the less turbulent Netherlands, which had granted the Jews a protective charter in 1619. From then until the Nazi deportations in 1942, the Netherlands remained a remarkably tolerant haven for Jews in Europe, excedeeing the tolerance extant in all other European countries at the time, and becoming one of the few Jewish havens until nineteenth century social and political reforms throughout much of Europe. Many Jews also fled to England, open to Jews since the mid seventeenth century, in which Jews were fundamentally ignored and not typically persecuted.
Historian Berel Wein notes:
:"''In a reversal of roles that is common in Jewish history, the victorious Poles now vented their wrath upon the hapless Jews of the area, accusing them of collaborating with the Cossack invader!... The Jews, reeling from almost five years of constant hell, abandoned their Polish communities and institutions..."'' (''Triumph of Survival'', 1990).
Throughout the sixteenth to eighteenth century, many of the szlachta mistreated peasantry, townsfolk and Jews. Threat of mob violence was a specter over the Jewish communities in Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth at the time. On one occasion in 1696, a mob threatened to massacre the Jewish community of Posin, Vitebsk. The mob accused the Jews of murdering a Pole. At the last moment, a peasant woman emerged with the victim's clothes and confessed to the murder. One notable example of actualized riots against Polish Jews is the rioting of 1716, during which many Jews lost their lives. Later, in 1723, the Bishop of Gda sk instigated the massacre of hundreds of Jews.
The legendary Walentyn Potocki, a Polish nobleman who converted to Judaism, is said to have been burned by auto da fe on May 24, 1749. In 1757, at the instigation of Jacob Frank and his followers, the Bishop of Kamianets Podilskyi forced the Jewish rabbis to participate in a religious dispute with the quasi Christian Frankists. Among the other charges, the Frankists claimed that the Talmud was full of heresy against Catholicism. The Catholic judges determined that the Frankists had won the debate, whereupon the Bishop levied heavy fines against the Jewish community and confiscated and burned all Jewish Talmuds. Polish anti Semitism during the seventeenth and eighteenth century was summed up by Issac de Pinto as follows: "''Polish Jews... who are deprived of all the privileges of society... who are despised and reviled on all sides, who are often persecuted, always insulted.... That contempt which is heaped on them chokes up all the seeds of virtue and honour....''" (Issac de Pinto, philosopher and economist, in a 1762 letter to Voltaire).
On the other hand, it should be noted that despite the mentioned incidents, the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth was a relative haven for Jews when compared to the period of the partitions of Poland and the PLC's destruction in 1795 (see Imperial Russia and the Soviet Union, below).
Anti Jewish sentiments continued to be present in Poland, even after the country regained its independence. One notable manifestation of these attitudes includes numerus clausus rules imposed, by almost all Polish universities in the 1930's. William W. Hagen in his ''Before the "Final Solution": Toward a Comparative Analysis of Political Anti Semitism in Interwar Germany and Poland'' article in ''Journal of Modern History (July, 1996): 1 31'', details:
:"''In Poland, the semidictatorial government of Pilsudski and his successors, pressured by an increasingly vocal opposition on the radical and fascist right, implemented many anti Semitic policies tending in a similar direction, while still others were on the official and semiofficial agenda when war descended in 1939.... In the 1930s the realm of official and semiofficial discrimination expanded to encompass limits on Jewish export firms... and, increasingly, on university admission itself. In 1921 22 some 25 percent of Polish university students were Jewish, but in 1938 39 their proportion had fallen to 8 percent.''"
While there are many examples of Polish support and help for the Jews during World War II and the Holocaust, there are also numerous examples of anti Semitic incidents, and the Jewish population was certain of the indifference towards their fate from the Christian Poles. The Polish Institute for National Memory identified twenty four pogroms against Jews during World War II, the largest occurring at the village of Jedwabne in 1941 (see massacre in Jedwabne).
After the end of World War II the remaining anti Jewish sentiments were skillfully used at certain moments by communist party or individual politicians in order to achieve their assumed political goals, which pinnacled in the March 1968 events. These sentiments started to diminish only with the collapse of the communist rule in Poland in 1989, which has resulted in a re examination of events between Jewish and Christian Poles, with a number of incidents, like the masscre at Jedwabne, being discussed openly for the first time. Violent anti semitism in Poland in 21st century is marginal compared to elsewhere, but there are very few Jews remaining in Poland. Still, according to recent (June 7, 2005) results of research by B'nai Briths Anti Defamation League, Poland remains among the European countries (with others being Italy, Spain and Germany) with the largest percentages of people holding anti Semitic views.
Poland is actively trying to address concerns about anti semitism. In 2004, the Polish government approved a National Action Program against racism, including anti semitism. Additionally the Polish Catholic Church has widely distributed materials promoting the need for respect and cooperation with Judaism.
Germany
''See main articles: History of the Jews in Germany, Holocaust''
From the early Middle Ages to the 18th century, the Jews in Germany were subject to many persecutions as well as brief times of tolerance. Though the 19th century began with a series of riots and pogroms against the Jews, emancipation followed in 1848, so that, by the early 20th century, the Jews of Germany were the most integrated in Europe. The situation changed in the early 1930's with the rise of the Nazis and their explicity anti Semitic program. Hate speech which referred to Jewish citizens as "dirty Jews" became common in anti Semitic pamphlets and newspapers such as the ''V lkischer Beobachter'' and ''Der St rmer''. Additionally, blame was laid on German Jews for having caused Germany's defeat in World War I (see ''Dolchstosslegende'').
's publication , 1938. The caption reads: "The God of the Jew is Money. And to gain money, he will commit the greatest crimes ."
Anti Jewish propaganda expanded rapidly. Nazi cartoons depicting "dirty Jews" frequently portrayed a dirty, physically unattractive and badly dressed "talmudic" Jew in traditional religious garments similar to those worn by Hasidic Jews. Articles attacking Jewish Germans, while concentrating on commercial and political activities of prominent Jewish individuals, also frequently attacked them based on religious dogmas, such as blood libel.
The Nazi anti Semitic program quickly expanded beyond mere speech. Starting in 1933, repressive laws were passed against Jews, culminating in the Nuremberg Laws which removed most of the rights of citizenship from Jews, using a racial definition based on descent, rather than any religious definition of who was a Jew. Sporadic violence against the Jews became widespread with the Kristallnacht riots, which targeted Jewish homes, businesses and places of worship, killing hundreds across Germany and Austria.
The anti Semitic agenda culminated in the genocide of the Jews of Europe, known as the Holocaust.
Russia and the Soviet Union
''Main articles: History of the Jews in Russia and Soviet Union, Pogrom''
The Pale of Settlement was the Western region of Imperial Russia to which Jews were restricted by the Tsarist Ukase of 1792. It consisted of the territories of former Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth, annexed with the existing numerous Jewish population, and the Crimea (which was later cut out from the Pale).
During 1881 1884, 1903 1906 and 1914 1921, waves of anti Semitic pogroms swept Russian Jewish communities. At least some pogroms are believed to have been organized or supported by the Russian okhranka although there is no hard evidence for this, the Russian police and army generally displayed indifference to the pogroms (e.g. during the three day First Kishinev pogrom of 1903), as well as to anti Jewish articles in newspapers which often instigated the pogroms.
During this period the May Laws policy was also put into effect, banning Jews from rural areas and towns, and placing strict quotas on the number of Jews allowed into higher education and many professions. The combination of the repressive legislation and pogroms propelled mass Jewish emigration, and by 1920 more than two million Russian Jews had emigrated, most to the United States while some made aliya to the Land of Israel.
One of the most infamous anti Semitic tractates was the Russian okhranka literary hoax, ''The Protocols of the Elders of Zion'', created in order to blame the Jews for Russia's problems during the period of revolutionary activity.
Even though many Old Bolsheviks were ethnically Jewish, they sought to uproot Judaism and Zionism and established the Yevsektsiya to achieve this goal. By the end of the 1940s the Communist leadership of the former USSR had liquidated almost all Jewish organizations, including Yevsektsiya.
The anti Semitic campaign of 1948 1953 against so called "rootless cosmopolitans," destruction of the Jewish Anti Fascist Committee, the fabrication of the "Doctors' plot," the rise of "Zionology" and subsequent activities of official organizations such as the Anti Zionist committee of the Soviet public were officially carried out under the banner of "anti Zionism," but the use of this term could not obscure the anti Semitic content of these campaigns, and by the mid 1950s the state persecution of Soviet Jews emerged as a major human rights issue in the West and domestically. See also: Jackson Vanik amendment, Refusenik, Pamyat.
Today, anti Semitic pronouncements, speeches and articles are common in Russia, and there are a large number of anti Semitic neo Nazi groups in the republics of the former Soviet Union, leading Pravda to declare in 2002 that "Anti semitism is booming in Russia". Over the past few years there have also been bombs attached to anti Semitic signs, apparently aimed at Jews, and other violent incidents, including stabbings, have been recorded.
Though the government of Vladimir Putin takes an official stand against anti semitism, some political parties and groups are explicitly anti Semitic, in spite of a Russian law (Art. 282) against fomenting racial, ethnic or religious hatred. In 2005, a group of 15 Duma members demanded that Judaism and Jewish organizations be banned from Russia. In June, 500 prominent Russians, including some 20 members of the nationalist ''Rodina'' party, demanded that the state prosecutor investigate ancient Jewish texts as "anti Russian" and ban Judaism the investigation was actually launched, but halted amid international outcry.
Asia
Japan
Originally Japan, with no Jewish population, had no anti Semitism but Nazi ideology and propaganda left an influence on Japan during World War II, and the Protocols of the Elders of Zion were translated into Japanese. Today, anti Semitism and belief in Jewish manipulation of Japan and the world remains despite the lack of any Jewish community in Japan. Books about Jewish conspiracies are best sellers. According to a 1988 survey, 8 of Japanese had read one of these books.
Anti Semitism and anti Zionism
Anti Zionism is a term that has been used to describe several very different political and religious points of view (both historically and in current debates) all expressing some form of opposition to Zionism. A large variety of commentators politicians, journalists, academics and others believe that criticisms of Israel and Zionism are often disproportionate in degree and unique in kind, and attribute this to anti Semitism. In turn, critics of this view believe that associating anti Zionism with anti Semitism is intended to stifle debate, deflect attention from valid criticism, and taint anyone opposed to Israeli actions and policies. This subject is discussed in the main article on Anti Zionism.
is commonly used in anti Semitic discourse.
New anti Semitism
In recent years some scholars of history, psychology, religion and representatives of Jewish groups, have noted what they describe as the ''new anti Semitism'', which uses the language of anti Zionism and criticism against Israel to attack the Jews more broadly.
The European Commission on Racism and Intolerance formally defined some of the ways in which anti Zionism may cross the line to anti Semitism: "Examples of the ways in which anti Semitism manifests itself with regard to the State of Israel taking into account the overall context could include: Denying the Jewish people right to self determination, e.g. by claiming that the existence of a state of Israel is a racist endeavor applying double standards by requiring of it a behavior not expected or demanded of any other democratic nation using the symbols and images associated with classic anti Semitism (e.g. claims of Jews killing Jesus or blood libel) to characterize Israel or Israelis drawing comparisons of contemporary Israeli policy to that of the Nazis and holding Jews collectively responsible for actions of the State of Israel."
Anti Semitism in the 21st century
According to the 2005 U.S. State Department Report on Global Anti Semitism, anti Semitism in Europe has increased significantly in recent years. Beginning in 2000, verbal attacks directed against Jews increased while incidents of vandalism (e.g. graffiti, fire bombings of Jewish schools, desecration of synagogues and cemeteries) surged. Physical assaults including beatings, stabbings and other violence against Jews in Europe increased markedly, in a number of cases resulting in serious injury and even death.
On January 1, 2006, Britain's chief rabbi, Sir Jonathan Sacks, warned that what he called a "tsunami of anti Semitism" was spreading globally. In an interview with BBC's Radio Four, Sacks said that anti Semitism was on the rise in Europe, and that a number of his rabbinical colleagues had been assaulted, synagogues desecrated, and Jewish schools burned to the ground in France. He also said that: "People are attempting to silence and even ban Jewish societies on campuses on the grounds that Jews must support the state of Israel, therefore they should be banned, which is quite extraordinary because ... British Jews see themselves as British citizens. So it's that kind of feeling that you don't know what's going to happen next that's making ... some European Jewish communities uncomfortable."
Much of the new European anti Semitic violence can actually be seen as a spill over from the long running Israeli Arab conflict since the majority of the perpetrators are from the large immigrant Arab communities in European cities. According to ''The Stephen Roth Institute for the Study of Contemporary Antisemitism and Racism'', most of the current anti Semitism comes from militant Islamist and Muslim groups, and most Jews tend to be assaulted in countries where groups of young Muslim immigrants reside.
Similarly, in the Middle East, anti Zionist propaganda frequently adopts the terminology and symbols of the Holocaust to demonize Israel and its leaders. This rhetoric often crosses the line separating the legitimate criticism of Israel and its policies to become anti Semitic vilification posing as legitimate political commentary. At the same time, Holocaust denial and Holocaust minimization efforts find increasingly overt acceptance as sanctioned historical discourse in a number of Middle Eastern countries.
The problem of anti Semitism is not only significant in Europe and in the Middle East, but there are also worrying expressions of it elsewhere. For example, in Pakistan, a country without a Jewish community, anti Semitic sentiment fanned by anti Semitic articles in the press is widespread. This reflects the more recent phenomenon of anti Semitism appearing in countries where historically or currently there are few or even no Jews.
See also
Jews and Judaism
Jewish history
Other articles on anti Semitism:
History of anti Semitism
Christianity and anti Semitism
Christian opposition to anti Semitism
Anti globalization and Anti Semitism
Arab anti Semitism
Saudi Arabia and anti Semitism
Islam and anti Semitism
New anti Semitism
Persecution of the Jews
Related topics:
Allophilia
Anti Zionism
Judeophobia
Self hating Jew
Racism
Topics related to religious anti Semitism:
Anti Judaism
Spanish Inquisition
Blood libel
Beilis trial in Russia
Host desecration
Edgardo Mortara
Anti semitic laws, policies, and government actions
Pogroms in Russia
May Laws in Russia
March 1968 events in Poland
Dreyfus affair in France
Farhud in Iraq
General Order No. 11 in the United States
Historical revisionism (political)
Nazi Germany and the Holocaust
Racial policy of Nazi Germany
Anti semitic websites
Jew Watch
Radio Islam
Institute for Historical Review
Organizations working against anti Semitism
Simon Wiesenthal Center
Anti Defamation League
Jewish Defense League
Other concepts
Religious Persecution
Persecution of Christians
Persecution of Muslims
Persecution of Hindus
Persecution of Atheists
References
John M. G. Barclay, ''Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora: From Alexander to Trajan (323 BCE 117 CE)''. University of California, 1999.
Pieter Willem Van Der Horst, ''Philo's Flaccus: the First Pogrom''. Philo of Alexandria Commentary Series. Brill. 2003.
Bodansky, Yossef. ''Islamic Anti Semitism as a Political Instrument'', Freeman Center For Strategic Studies, 1999
Gideon Bohak, "The Ibis and the Jewish Question: Ancient 'Anti Semitism' in Historical Context" in Menachem Mor et al, ''Jews and Gentiles in the Holy Land in the Days of the Second Temple, the Mishna and the Talmud''. Jerusalem: Yad Ben Zvi Press, 2003. p 27 43.
Carr, Steven Alan. ''Hollywood and anti Semitism: A cultural history up to World War II'', Cambridge University Press 2001
Cohn, Norman. ''Warrant for Genocide'', Eyre Serif, 1996.
Freudmann, Lillian C. ''Antisemitism in the New Testament'', University Press of America, 1994.
Gillan, Audrey. , ''The Guardian'', January 2, 2006
Hilberg, Raul. ''The Destruction of the European Jews''. Holmes Meier, 1985. 3 volumes
Lipstadt, Deborah. ''Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory'', Penguin, 1994.
Matas, David. ''Aftershock: Anti Zionism and anti Semitism''. Dundurn Press, 2005.
A M Roth, Norman Roth, Jews, Visigoths and Muslims in Medieval Spain, Brill Academic, 1994.
Selzer, Michael (ed). ''"Kike!" : A documentary history of anti semitism in America'', New York 1972
Peter Schafer. ''Judeophobia'', Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1997. p 208.
External links
(with up to date calendar of anti semitism today)
hosted by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem's Center for the Study of Antisemitism (SICSA)
hosted by the Tel Aviv University (includes an annual report)
an analysis of Anti Semitism by Paul Johnson in ''Commentary Magazine''
documents antisemitism in Middle Eastern media.
based on a
at Zionism and Israel Information Center.
A mini study with extensive links and resources.
: Research by April Rosenblum to develop a working definition of antisemitism, and related teaching tools about antisemitism, for activists.
! interwiki
ar:
bg:
cs:Antisemitismus
cy:Gwrth Semitiaeth
da:Antisemitisme
de:Antisemitismus bis 1945
et:Antisemitism
el:
es:Antisemitismo
eo:Antisemitismo
fr:Antis mitisme
hr:Antisemitizam
it:Antisemitismo
he:
hu:Antiszemitizmus
mk:
nl:Antisemitisme
ja:
no:Antisemittisme
pl:Antysemityzm
pt:Anti semitismo
ro:Antisemitism
ru:
simple:Anti Semitism
sr:
fi:Antisemitismi
sv:Antisemitism
uk:
zh:
REDIRECT History of Argentina
This article describes the '''geography of American Samoa'''.
Location:
: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about two thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand
Geographic coordinates:
:
Map references:
: Oceania
Area:
: Total: 199 km
: Land: 199 km
: Water: 0 km
: Note: Includes Rose Atoll and Swains Island
Area comparative:
: Slightly larger than Washington, DC
Land boundaries:
: 0 km
Coastline:
: 116 km
Maritime claims:
: Exclusive economic zone: 200 nm (370.4 km)
: Territorial sea: 12 nm (22.2 km)
Climate:
: Tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds annual rainfall averages about 3 m rainy season from November to April, dry season from May to October little seasonal temperature variation
Island Names in order of size:
: Tutuila, Ta, Ofu, Olosega, Aunuu, Swains Island, Rose Atoll
Terrain:
: Five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited coastal plains, two coral atolls (Rose and Swains)
Elevation extremes:
: Lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
: Highest point: Lata 966 m
Natural resources:
: Pumice, pumicite
Land use:
: Arable land: 5
: Permanent crops: 10
: Permanent pastures: 0
: Forests and woodland: 70
: Other: 15 (1993 est.)
Irrigated land:
: NA km
Natural hazards:
: Hurricane season from December to March Hurricane Heta struck Tutuila and Manu a January, 2004.
: Landslides
Environment current issues:
: Limited natural fresh water resources the water division of the government has spent substantial funds in the past few years to expand well system, improve water catchments and pipelines
Geography note:
: Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater harbors in the South Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough seas and protected by peripheral mountains from high winds strategic location in the South Pacific Ocean
MapQuest zoom level 4 shows the location with respect to the state of Samoa.
Category:American Samoa
American Samoa
he:
, year 2005 Number of inhabitants in thousands.
'''Population:'''
57,902 (July 2004 est.)
'''Age structure:'''
br''0 14 years:''
36.6 (male 10,983 female 10,208)
br''15 64 years:''
60.3 (male 18,010 female 16,933)
br''65 years and over:''
3.1 (male 699 female 1,069) (2004 est.)
'''Population growth rate:'''
0.04 (2004 est.)
'''Birth rate:'''
24.46 births 1,000 population (2004 est.)
'''Death rate:'''
3.39 deaths 1,000 population (2004 est.)
'''Net migration rate:'''
20.71 migrant(s) 1,000 population (2004 est.)
'''Sex ratio:'''
br''at birth:''
1.06 male(s) female
br''under 15 years:''
1.08 male(s) female
br''15 64 years:''
1.06 male(s) female
br''65 years and over:''
0.65 male(s) female
br''total population:''
1.05 male(s) female (2004 est.)
'''Infant mortality rate:'''
9.48 deaths 1,000 live births (2004 est.)
'''Life expectancy at birth:'''
br''total population:''
75.62 years
br''male:''
72.05 years
br''female:''
79.41 years (2004 est.)
'''Total fertility rate:'''
3.41 children born woman (2000 est.)
'''Nationality:'''
br''noun:''
American Samoan(s)
br''adjective:''
American Samoan
'''Ethnic groups:'''
Samoan (Polynesian) 89 , Caucasian 2 , Tongan 4 , other 5
'''Religions:'''
Christian Congregationalist 50 , Roman Catholic 20 , Protestant and other 30
'''Languages:'''
Samoan (closely related to Hawaiian and other Polynesian languages), English
br''note:''
most people are bilingual
'''Literacy:'''
br''definition:''
age 15 and over can read and write
br''total population:''
97
br''male:''
98
br''female:''
97 (1980 est.)
:''See also :'' American Samoa
Category:American Samoa
he:
'''Politics of American Samoa''' takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic dependency, whereby the Governor is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi party system. American Samoa is a unincorporated and unorganized territory of the United States, administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the Interior. Its constitution was ratified 1966 and came into effect 1967. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the legislature. The party system is a copy of the United States party system. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
Executive branch
President of the United States
George W. Bush
Republican
20 January 2001
Governor
Togiola Tulafono
Democrat
26 March 2003
The governor and the lieutenant governor are elected on the same ticket by popular vote for four year terms.
Legislative branch
The '''Legislature''' or ''Fono'' has two chambers. The House of Representatives has eighteen members, elected for a two year term, seventeen in single seat constituencies and one by a public meeting on Swain Island. The Senate has eighteen members, elected for a four year term by and from the chiefs of the islands.
Political parties and elections
At the 2 November 2004 election Eni F. H. Faleomavaega of the Democratic Party (United States) defeated the Republican candidate and was re elected.
Judicial branch
The High Court (chief justice and associate justices are appointed by the US Secretary of the Interior)
International organization participation
ESCAP (associate), Interpol (subbureau), IOC, SPC
Category:Politics of American Samoa
he:
'''Economy overview:'''
This is a traditional Polynesian economy in which more than 90 of the land is communally owned. Economic activity is strongly linked to the US, with which American Samoa conducts the great bulk of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna processing plants are the backbone of the private sector, with canned tuna the primary export. Transfers from the US Government add substantially to American Samoa's economic well being. Attempts by the government to develop a larger and broader economy are restrained by Samoa's remote location, its limited transportation, and its devastating hurricanes. Tourism, a developing sector, may be held back by the current financial difficulties in East Asia.
Numbers
'''GDP:'''
purchasing power parity 500 million (2000 est.)
'''GDP real growth rate:'''
NA
'''GDP per capita:'''
purchasing power parity 8,000 (2000 est.)
'''GDP composition by sector:'''
br''agriculture:''
NA
br''industry:''
NA
br''services:''
NA (2002)
'''Population below poverty line:'''
NA (2002 est.)
'''Household income or consumption by percentage share:'''
br''lowest 10 :''
NA
br''highest 10 :''
NA
'''Inflation rate (consumer prices):'''
NA (2003 est.)
'''Labor force:'''
14,000 (1996)
'''Labor force by occupation:'''
government 33 , tuna canneries 34 , other 33 (1990)
'''Unemployment rate:'''
6 (2000)
'''Budget:'''
br''revenues:''
121 million (37 in local revenue and 63 in US grants)
br''expenditures:''
127 million, including capital expenditures of NA (FY96 97)
'''Industries:'''
tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign fishing vessels), handicrafts
'''Industrial production growth rate:'''
NA
'''Electricity production:'''
130 GWh (2001)
'''Electricity production by source:'''
br''fossil fuel:''
100
br''hydro:''
0
br''nuclear:''
0
br''other:''
0 (2001)
'''Electricity consumption:'''
120.9 GWh (2001)
'''Electricity exports:'''
0 kWh (2001)
'''Electricity imports:'''
0 kWh (2001)
'''Oil production:'''
0 barrel day (2001 est.)
'''Oil consumption:'''
3,800 barrel day (604 m d) 2001
'''Oil exports:'''
NA
'''Oil imports:'''
NA
'''Agriculture products:'''
bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples, papayas dairy products, livestock
'''Exports:'''
30 million (2002)
'''Exports commodities:'''
canned tuna 93
'''Exports partners:'''
Indonesia 70 , Australia 6.7 , Japan 6.7 , Samoa 6.7 (2002)
'''Imports:'''
123 million (2002)
'''Imports commodities:'''
materials for canneries 56 , food 8 , petroleum products 7 , machinery and parts 6
'''Imports partners:'''
Australia 36.6 , New Zealand 20.3 , South Korea 16.3 , Mauritius 4.9 (2002)
'''Debt external:'''
NA (2002 est.)
'''Economic aid recipient:'''
NA note important financial support from the US, more than 40 million in 1994
'''Currency:'''
US dollar (USD)
'''Currency code:'''
USD
'''Exchange rates:'''
US dollar is used
'''Fiscal year:'''
1 October 30 September
See also
American Samoa
Category:American Samoa
American Samoa
he:
'''Telephones main lines in use:'''
15,000 (2001)
'''Telephones mobile cellular:'''
2,377 (1999)
'''Telephone system:'''
br''domestic:''
good telex, telegraph, facsimile and cellular telephone services domestic satellite system with 1 Comsat earth station
br''international:''
country code 1 684 satellite earth station 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)
'''Radio broadcast stations:'''
AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1998)
'''Radios:'''
57,000 (1997)
'''Television broadcast stations:'''
1 (1997)
'''Televisions:'''
14,000 (1997)
'''Internet Service Providers (ISPs):'''
Samoa Teleco
'''Internet country code:'''
.as
'''Internet users:'''
NA
:''See also :'' American Samoa
Category:American Samoa
American Samoa
he:
'''Railways:'''
0 km
'''Highways:'''
br''total:''
350 km
br''paved:''
150 km
br''unpaved:''
200 km
'''Ports and harbors:'''
Aunuu, Auasi, Falesao, Ofu, Pago Pago
'''Merchant marine:'''
none (1999 est.)
'''Airports:'''
3 (2003 est.)
'''Airports with paved runways:'''
br''total:''
3
br''2,438 to 3,047 m:''
1
br''under 914 m:''
2 (2005 est.)
'''Airports with unpaved runways:'''
br''total:''
0
:''See also :'' American Samoa, List of highways in American Samoa
Category:American Samoa
American Samoa
he:
MP, Prime Minister of Australia and leader of the Liberal Party
MP, Leader of the Opposition and Leader of the Australian Labor Party
The '''politics of Australia''' take place within the framework of parliamentary democracy. The government of Australia is a federation, and Australians elect state and territory legislatures as well as a bicameral Parliament of Australia based on the Westminster System.
At the national level, elections are held at least once every three years. The Prime Minister can advise the Governor General to call an election for the House of Representatives at any time, but Senate elections can only be held within certain periods prescribed in the Constitution. The last general election was in October 2004. The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia consists of two chambers:
The House of Representatives has 150 members, elected for a three year term in single seat constituencies with a system of alternative vote known as preferential voting.
The Senate has 76 members, elected through a preferential system in 12 seat state constituencies and two seat territorial constituencies with a system of single non transferable vote. Electors choose territorial senators for a three year term. The state senators serve for a six year term, with half of the seats renewed every three years.
Political parties and elections
More info: Australian legislative election, 2004''
Three political parties dominate Australian politics. Of these, two govern together in a Coalition:
The Liberal Party is a party of the centre right which broadly represents business, the suburban middle classes and many rural people.
Its junior coalition partner is the National Party of Australia, formerly the Country Party and now known for electoral purposes as "The Nationals", a conservative party which represents rural interests.
The Australian Labor Party (ALP) is a social democratic party founded by the trade union movement and broadly represents the urban working class, although it increasingly has a base of middle class support.
Minor parties include:
The Australian Democrats, a party of middle class liberals
The Australian Greens, a left wing and environmentalist party
The Country Liberal Party, a party which only represents the Northern Territory. It is part of the Liberal National Coalition
The Family First Party, a party appealing to conservative Christians.
The proportional representation system allows these parties to win seats in the Australian Senate and in the state upper houses, but they have usually been unable to win seats in the House of Representatives (the Greens won a House seat at a 2002 by election, but lost it in the 2004 general election).
The Liberal National coalition came to power in the March 1996 election, ending 13 years of Labor government and making John Howard Prime Minister. He was subsequently re elected in October 1998, November 2001 and October 2004. The coalition now holds a comfortable majority in the House of Representatives. In the Senate, the Liberal National coalition was in a minority until the 2004 election, but from July 2005 it has a working majority there. Until 2004, lacking a majority in the Senate, the Liberal National coalition relied on negotiations with the smaller parties and independents to secure the passage of legislation.
Since its election, Howard's conservative coalition has moved to reduce the government's fiscal deficit and the influence of organised labour, placing more emphasis on workplace based collective bargaining for wages. The Howard government also accelerated the pace of privatisation of government owned enterprises that began with the Hawke Labor government. During its first two terms, the government's most sweeping change was the introduction of a goods and services tax. With the re election of the Howard government in 2004, several significant and controversial bills have been passed, due to the government's newly acquired Senate majority. These major changes have included a radical revamp of industrial relations laws, an introduction of voluntary student unionism, and the full privatisation of telecommunications company Telstra. These changes have sparked major debate within Australia, forcing many critics to question whether the Howard government has lived up to its promise to use its Senate majority wisely.
The Howard government has reversed the foreign policy of its predecessor, placing renewed emphasis on relations with Australia's traditional allies, the United States and Britain and downgrading support for the United Nations in favour of bilateralism. Both major parties support maintaining good relations with regional powers such as China, Japan and Indonesia, although issues such as the independence of East Timor have sometimes made this difficult. Australia has become increasingly involved in the internal difficulties of its smaller neighbours, such as Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Fiji and Nauru.
The list of political parties in Australia comprises the names and federal leaders of significant political parties as well as the names of other parties, including formerly significant parties.
Administrative divisions
In the states and territories, elections are held at least once every four years (except in Queensland, which has three year terms). In New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory, election dates are fixed by legislation. However, the other state premiers and territory Chief Ministers have the same discretion in calling elections as the Prime Minister at the national level. (See ''Main articles: Australian electoral system, Electoral systems of the Australian states and territories'').
Regional or local government within each state is handled by Local Government Areas and unlike other equivalent forms of local government such as those of the United States, have relatively little power compared to the state governments (See ''Main article: Local government in Australia'').
See also
List of Australian politicians
Politics of Australia and Canada compared
Politics of Australia and New Zealand compared
Political blogs in Australia
lb:Politik vun Australien
lt:Australijos politin sistema
pl:Ustr j polityczny Australii
pt:Pol tica da Austr lia
style "float:right "
'''August 13''' is the 225th day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar (226th in leap years), with 140 days remaining.
Events
3114 BC According to the Lounsbury corollation, the Maya calendar starts.
523 John succeeds Hormisdas as Pope.
1099 Paschal II elected Pope.
1315 Louis X of France marries Clemence d'Anjou.
1326 Aradia de Toscano, according to legend folklore, is initiated into a Dianic witchcraft cult, subsequently founds the tradition of Stregheria later known as the Malandanti.
1415 Henry V of England lands at Chef en Caux, France with 8000 men.
1516 Treaty of Noyon between France and Spain signed. In it, Francis recognizes Charles's claim to Naples, and Charles recognizes Francis's claim to Milan.
1521 Tenochtitl n (present day Mexico City) falls to conquistador Hern n Cort s
1536 Buddhist monks from Kyoto's Enryaku Temple set fire to 21 Nichiren temples throughout Kyoto in the Tenbun Hokke Disturbance. (Traditional Japanese date: July 27 1536).
1553 Michael Servetus arrested by John Calvin in Geneva as a heretic.
1704 War of the Spanish Succession: Battle of Blenheim English and Austrians victorious over French and Bavarians.
1814 The Convention of London, a treaty between the United Kingdom and the United Provinces, is signed in London.
1905 Norway holds referendum in favour of dissolving the union with Sweden.
1913 Otto Witte, an acrobat, is crowned King of Albania.
1913 Invention of stainless steel by Harry Brearley.
1918 Women enlist in the United States Marine Corps for the first time. Opha Mae Johnson is the first woman to enlist.
1920 Polish Soviet War: Battle of Warsaw begins, lasts till August 25. The Red Army is defeated.
1923 First major sea going ship arrives at Gdynia, newly constructed Polish seaport.
1937 Battle of Shanghai (1937) begins.
1940 World War II: Battle of Britain begins The Luftwaffe launches a series of attacks on British fighter bases and radar installations.
1942 Walt Disney's fifth animated feature, ''Bambi'', premiers.
1960 The Central African Republic declares independence from France.
1961 The German Democratic Republic closes the border between the eastern and western sectors of Berlin, to thwart its inhabitants' attempts to escape to the West.
1968 Alexandros Panagoulis attempts to assassinate the Greek dictator Colonel G. Papadopoulos in Varkiza, Athens, Greece.
1987 U.S. President Ronald Reagan assumes responsibility for his role in the Iran Contra scandal.
1996 Marc Dutroux, his wife Michelle Martin, and Michel Leli vre are arrested on suspicion of kidnapping. All are found guilty on June 22, 2004, with sentences of life, 30, and 25 years, respectively.
1997 ''South Park'' debuts on Comedy Central.
2004 The 28th Summer Olympics opens in Athens, Greece.
2004 Hurricane Charley, a Category 4 storm, strikes the Fort Myers, Florida, area.
2004 Black Friday crackdown by NSS on a peaceful protest in the capital city of Maldives, Mal .
2004 156 Congolese Tutsi refugees massacred at the Gatumba refugee camp in Burundi.
2004 Adam Curry's first Daily Source Code is created, launching podcasting.
Births
582 Arnulf of Metz, French bishop and saint (d. 640)
1311 King Alfonso XI of Castile and Leon (d. 1350)
1313 Aradia de Toscano, Italian insurrectionist, teacher, and witch
1584 Theophilus Howard, 2nd Earl of Suffolk, English politician (d. 1640)
1625 Rasmus Bartholin, Danish physician, mathematician, and physicist (d. 1698)
1662 Charles Seymour, 6th Duke of Somerset, English politician (d. 1748)
1666 William Wotton, English scholar (d. 1727)
1700 Heinrich, count von Br hl, German statesman (d. 1763)
1717 Louis Fran ois I, Prince of Conti, French military leader (d. 1776)
1721 Jacques Lelong, French bibliographer (b. 1665)
1792 Adelaide of Saxe Meiningen, queen of William IV of the United Kingdom (d. 1849)
1803 Vladimir Odoevsky, Russian philosopher and writer (d. 1869)
1814 Anders Jonas ngstr m, Swedish physicist (d. 1874)
1818 Lucy Stone, American suffragette (d. 1893)
1819 George Gabriel Stokes, French physicist (d. 1903)
1820 Sir George Grove, English music historian (d. 1900)
1823 Goldwin Smith, English born historian and journalist (d. 1910)
1851 Felix Adler, German born educator (d. 1933)
1860 Annie Oakley, American sharpshooter (d. 1926)
1866 Giovanni Agnelli, Italian industrialist (d. 1945)
1872 Richard Willst tter, German chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1942)
1879 John Ireland, English composer (d. 1962)
1887 Julius Freed, American inventor and banker (d. 1952)
1888 John Logie Baird, Scottish television pioneer (d. 1946)
1895 Bert Lahr, American actor (d. 1967)
1899 Sir Alfred Joseph Hitchcock, English film director (d. 1980)
1902 Felix Wankel, German engineer and inventor (d. 1988)
1904 Charles 'Buddy' Rogers, American actor (d. 1999)
1907 Sir Basil Spence, Scottish architect (d. 1976)
1912 Ben Hogan, American golfer (d. 1997)
1912 Salvador Luria, Italian born biologist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (d. 1991)
1913 Fred Davis, English snooker player (d. 1998)
1918 Frederick Sanger, English chemist, Nobel Pirze laureate
1919 George Shearing, British musician
1920 Neville Brand, American actor (d. 1992)
1926 Fidel Castro, Cuban revolutionary and politician
1930 Don Ho, American musician
1933 Doctor Joycelyn Elders, United States Surgeon General
1941 Erin Fleming, Canadian actress (d. 2003)
1944 Kevin Tighe, American actor
1948 Kathleen Battle, American soprano
1949 Bobby Clarke, Canadian hockey player
1951 Dan Fogelberg, American singer
1952 Herb Ritts, American photographer (d. 2004)
1959 Danny Bonaduce, American actor
1961 Sandra Miranda, Puerto Rican Hair Stylist and Entrepeneur
1967 Am lie Nothomb, Belgian writer
1969 Midori Ito, Japanese figure skater
1970 Matthew Hyson, American professional wrestler
1970 Alan Shearer, English footballer
1971 Nichola Holt, contestant in Big Brother UK series 1 and porn actress
1972 Hani Hanjour, September 11, 2001 pilot and terrorist
1973 Brittany Andrews, American model and actress
1975 Joe Perry, English snooker player
1977 Michael Klim, Australian swimmer
1979 Taizo Sugimura, Japanese politician
1982 Shani Davis, American speed skater
Deaths
586 Radegund, queen of Clotaire I
900 Zwentibold, last King of Lotharingia (b. 870)
1382 Eleanor of Aragon, queen of John I of Castile (b. 1358)
1523 Gerard David, Flemish painter
1617 Johann Jakob Grynaeus, Swiss protestant clergyman (b. 1540)
1667 Jeremy Taylor, Irish author and bishop (b. 1613)
1686 Louis Maimbourg, French born historian (b. 1610)
1744 John Cruger, Dutch born Mayor of New York (b. 1678)
1749 Johann Elias Schlegel, German critic and poet (b. 1719)
1755 Francesco Durante, Italian composer (b. 1684)
1826 Ren La nnec, French physician (b. 1781)
1863 Eug ne Delacroix, French painter (b. 1798)
1865 Ignaz Semmelweis, Austro Hungarian physician (b. 1818)
1910 Florence Nightingale, English nurse (b. 1820)
1912 Jules Massenet, French composer (b. 1842)
1917 Eduard Buchner, German chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1860)
1946 H. G. Wells, English writer (b. 1866)
1958 Otto Witte, acrobat and King of Albania (b. 1868)
1965 Ikeda Hayato, Prime Minister of Japan (b. 1899)
1984 Tigran Petrosian, Georgian chess player (b. 1929).
1989 Tim Richmond, American race car driver (b. 1955)
1994 Elias Canetti, Bulgarian born writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1905)
1995 Jan Kesadlo, Czech born writer (b. 1926)
1995 Mickey Mantle, baseball player (b. 1931)
1996 David Tudor, American pianist and composer (b. 1926).
1999 Jaime Garz n, Colombian journalist and comedian, murdered (b. 1960)
2003 Ed Townsend, American songwriter and producer (b. 1929).
2004 Julia Child, American chef and television personality (b. 1912)
2005 David Lange, Prime Minister of New Zealand (b. 1942)
Holidays and observances
Roman festivals Vertumnalias in honor of Vertumnus, and also Diana, on the Aventine hill
RC saints Pontianus and Hippolytus, Radegunde (help against the pox), Cassianus of Imola (patron of shorthand writers)
International Lefthanders Day
In Brasil, Friday 13 August (''agosto'') is considered to be especially filled with sorrow (''desgosto'')
External links
August 12 August 14 July 13 September 13 listing of all days
af:13 Augustus
ar:13
an:13 d'agosto
ast:13 d'agostu
bg:13
be:13
bs:13. august
ca:13 d'agost
ceb:Agosto 13
cv: , 13
co:13 d'aostu
cs:13. srpen
cy:13 Awst
da:13. august
de:13. August
et:13. august
el:13
es:13 de agosto
eo:13 a de a gusto
eu:Abuztuaren 13
fo:13. august
fr:13 ao t
fy:13 augustus
ga:13 L nasa
gl:13 de agosto
ko:8 13
hr:13. kolovoza
io:13 di agosto
id:13 Agustus
ia:13 de augusto
ie:13 august
is:13. g st
it:13 agosto
he:13
jv:13 Agustus
ka:13
csb:13 z lnika
ku:13' gelaw j
lt:Rugpj io 13
lb:13. August
li:13 augustus
hu:Augusztus 13
mk:13
ms:13 Ogos
nap:13 'e a sto
nl:13 augustus
ja:8 13
no:13. august
nn:13. august
oc:13 d'agost
pl:13 sierpnia
pt:13 de Agosto
ro:13 august
ru:13
sco:13 August
sq:13 Gusht
scn:13 di austu
simple:August 13
sk:13. august
sl:13. avgust
sr:13.
fi:13. elokuuta
sv:13 augusti
tl:Agosto 13
tt:13. August
te: 13
th:13
vi:13 th ng 8
tr:13 A ustos
uk:13
wa:13 d' awousse
war:Agosto 13
zh:8 13
pam:Agostu 13
.
'''Ab Al al usayn ibn Abd All h ibn S n ''' (Arabic: ''' ''') often refered to by his Latinized name '''Avicenna''' was a Persian Muslim physician, philosopher, and scientist who was born in 980 in Kharmaithen near Bukhara, now in Uzbekistan (then Iran), and died June 1037 in Hamadan, Iran.
He was the author of 450 books on a wide range of subjects. Many of these concentrated on philosophy and medicine. He is considered by many to be "the father of modern medicine." George Sarton called Ibn Sina "the most famous scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places, and times." His most famous works are ''The Book of Healing'' and ''The Canon of Medicine'', also known as the ''Qanun'' (full title: ''al qanun fil tibb'').
Early life
His life is known to us from authoritative sources. An autobiography covers his first thirty years, and the rest are documented by his disciple al Juzajani, who was also his secretary and his friend.
He was born in 370 (AH) 980 (AD) in Afshana, his mother's home, a small city now part of Uzbekistan (then part of the Islamic Caliphate) and his Father from Balkh now part of Afghanistan (then also part of the Islamic Caliphate). His native language was Persian. His father, an official of the Samanid administration, had him very carefully educated at Bukhara. Although traditionally influenced by the Ismaili branch of Islam, his independent thought was served by an extraordinary intelligence and memory, which allowed him to overtake his teachers at the age of fourteen.
Ibn Sina was put under the charge of a tutor, and his precocity soon made him the marvel of his neighbours he displayed exceptional intellectual behaviour and was a child prodigy who had memorized the Koran by the age of 10 and a great deal of Arabic poetry as well. From a greengrocer he learned arithmetic, and he began to learn more from a wandering scholar who gained a livelihood by curing the sick and teaching the young.
However he was greatly troubled by metaphysical problems and in particular the works of Aristotle. So, for the next year and a half, he also studied philosophy, in which he encountered greater obstacles. In such moments of baffled inquiry, he would leave his books, perform the requisite ablutions, then go to the mosque, and continue in prayer till light broke on his difficulties. Deep into the night he would continue his studies, stimulating his senses by occasional cups of goat's milk, and even in his dreams problems would pursue him and work out their solution. Forty times, it is said, he read through the ''Metaphysics'' of Aristotle, till the words were imprinted on his memory but their meaning was hopelessly obscure, until one day they found illumination, from the little commentary by Farabi, which he bought at a bookstall for the small sum of three dirhems. So great was his joy at the discovery, thus made by help of a work from which he had expected only mystery, that he hastened to return thanks to God, and bestowed alms upon the poor.
He turned to medicine at 16, and not only learned medical theory, but by gratuitous attendance on the sick had, according to his own account, discovered new methods of treatment. The teenager achieved full status as a physician at age 18 and found that "Medicine is no hard and thorny science, like mathematics and metaphysics, so I soon made great progress I became an excellent doctor and began to treat patients, using approved remedies." The youthful physician's fame spread quickly, and he treated many patients without asking for payment.
His first appointment was that of physician to the emir, who owed him his recovery from a dangerous illness (997). Ibn Sina's chief reward for this service was access to the royal library of the Samanids, well known patrons of scholarship and scholars. When the library was destroyed by fire not long after, the enemies of Ibn Sina accused him of burning it, in order for ever to conceal the sources of his knowledge. Meanwhile, he assisted his father in his financial labours, but still found time to write some of his earliest works.
When Ibn Sina was 22 years old, he lost his father. The Samanid dynasty came to its end in December 1004. Ibn Sina seems to have declined the offers of Mahmud of Ghazni, and Ibn Sina proceeded westwards to Urgench in the modern Uzbekistan, where the vizier, regarded as a friend of scholars, gave him a small monthly stipend. The pay was small, however, so Ibn Sina wandered from place to place through the districts of Nishapur and Merv to the borders of Khorasan, seeking an opening for his talents. Shams al Ma' li Q btis, the generous ruler of Dailam, himself a poet and a scholar, with whom Ibn Sina had expected to find an asylum, was about that date (1052) starved to death by his own revolted soldiery. Ibn Sina himself was at this season stricken down by a severe illness. Finally, at Gorgan, near the Caspian Sea, Ibn Sina met with a friend, who bought a dwelling near his own house in which Ibn Sina lectured on logic and astronomy. For this patron, several of Ibn Sina's treatises were written and the commencement of his ''Canon of Medicine'' also dates from his stay in Hyrcania.
thumb 200px left Poland commemorated Avicenna's life and work in this postage stamp
Ibn Sina subsequently settled at Rai, in the vicinity of the modern Tehran, (present day capital of Iran), the home town of Rhazes where Majd Addaula, a son of the last emir, was nominal ruler under the regency of his mother (Seyyedeh Khatun). At Rai about thirty of his shorter works are said to have been composed. Constant feuds which raged between the regent and her second son, Amir Shamsud Dawala, compelling the scholar to quit the place. After a brief sojourn at Qazvin, he passed southwards to Hamad n, where that prince had established himself. At first, Ibn Sina entered into the service of a high born lady but the emir, hearing of his arrival, called him in as medical attendant, and sent him back with presents to his dwelling. Ibn Sina was even raised to the office of vizier. The amir consented that he should be banished from the country. Ibn Sina, however, remained hidden for forty days in a sheikh's house, till a fresh attack of illness induced the emir to restore him to his post. Even during this perturbed time, Ibn Sina prosecuted his studies and teaching. Every evening, extracts from his great works, the ''Canon'' and the ''Sanatio'', were dictated and explained to his pupils among whom, when the lesson was over, he spent the rest of the night in festive enjoyment with a band of singers and players. On the death of the amir, Ibn Sina ceased to be vizier and hid himself in the house of an apothecary, where, with intense assiduity, he continued the composition of his works.
Meanwhile, he had written to Abu Ya'far, the prefect of the dynamic city of Isfahan, offering his services. The new emir of Hamadan, hearing of this correspondence and discovering where Ibn Sina's was hidden, incarcerated him in a fortress. War meanwhile continued between the rulers of Isfahan and Hamad n in 1024 the former captured Hamadan and its towns, expelling the Turkish mercenaries. When the storm had passed, Ibn Sina returned with the amir to Hamadan, and carried on his literary labours. Later, however, accompanied by his brother, a favourite pupil, and two slaves, Ibn Sina escaped out of the city in the dress of a Sufite ascetic. After a perilous journey, they reached Isfahan, receiving an honourable welcome from the prince. Avicenna also introduced medical herbs.
Late life
The remaining ten or twelve years of Avicenna's life were spent in the service of Abu Ya'far 'Ala Addaula, whom he accompanied as physician and general literary and scientific adviser, even in his numerous campaigns.
During these years he began to study literary matters and philology, instigated, it is asserted, by criticisms on his style. But amid his restless study Ibn Sina never forgot his love of enjoyment. Unusual bodily vigour enabled him to combine severe devotion to work with facile indulgence in sensual pleasures. Versatile, lighthearted, boastful and pleasure loving, he contrasts with the nobler and more intellectual character of Averroes. His bouts of pleasure gradually weakened his constitution a severe colic, which seized him on the march of the army against Hamad n, was checked by remedies so violent that Ibn Sina could scarcely stand. On a similar occasion the disease returned with difficulty he reached Hamad n, where, finding the disease gaining ground, he refused to keep up the regimen imposed, and resigned himself to his fate.
His friends advised him to slow down and take life moderately. He refused, however, stating that: ''"I prefer a short life with width to a narrow one with length"''. On his deathbed remorse seized him he bestowed his goods on the poor, restored unjust gains, freed his slaves, and every third day till his death listened to the reading of the Qur'an. He died in June 1037, in his fifty eighth year, and was buried in Hamedan, Iran.
Works
Ibn Sina is comparable to such greats as Abu Bakr Mohammad Ibn Zakariya al Razi. However, despite such glorious tributes to his work, Ibn Sina is rarely remembered in the West today and his fundamental contributions to medicine and the European reawakening go largely unrecognised.
Ibn Sina is usually considered as a great philosopher and physician. His philosophical disciple is not a live school in western philosophy today. Unfortunately, the West only pays attention to some portion of his philosophy, which is known as the ''Latin Avicennaian School,'' and his other significant philosophical contribution, which had been hailed by Suhrawardi, is still unknown to West. This notable part is called ''' ''' (''hikmat al mashriqqiyya'') by him. In some of his writings, he mentions this to his disciples as his major achievement. Heavily influenced by Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi made philosophical contributions which have developed much from Ibn Sina's work, later founding illuminationist philosophy and believing to have finished what Ibn Sina began.
Ibn Sina also wrote extensively on the subjects of philosophy, logic, ethics, metaphysics and other disciplines. All his works were written in Arabic which was the ''de facto'' scientific language of that time, and some were written in the Persian language. Of linguistic significance even to this day are a few books that he wrote in nearly pure Persian language citation needed . Unlike Aquinas who more or less sanctified Aristotle as church dogma, Ibn Sina corrected him often, encouraging a lively debate in the spirit of ijtihad. Accordingly he is one of the earliest pioneers of the scientific process of peer review as we know it today, his influence on that process being profound at least, and perhaps even decisive.
About 100 treatises were ascribed to Ibn Sina. Some of them are tracts of a few pages, others are works extending through several volumes. The best known amongst them, and that to which Ibn Sina owed his European reputation, is his 14 volume ''The Canon of Medicine'', which was a standard medical text in Western Europe for seven centuries. It classifies and describes diseases, and outlines their assumed causes. Hygiene, simple and complex medicines, and functions of parts of the body are also covered. It asserts that tuberculosis was contagious, which was later disputed by Europeans, but turned out to be true. It also describes the symptoms and complications of diabetes. An Arabic edition of the ''Canons'' appeared at Rome in 1593, and a Hebrew version at Naples in 1491. Of the Latin version there were about thirty editions, founded on the original translation by Gerard of Cremona. The 15th century has the honour of composing the great commentary on the text of the ''Canon'', grouping around it all that theory had imagined, and all that practice had observed. Other medical works translated into Latin are the ''Medicamenta Cordialia'', ''Canticum de Medicina'', and the ''Tractatus de Syrupo Acetoso''.
It was mainly accident which determined that from the 12th to the 17th century Ibn Sina should be the guide of medical study in European universities, and eclipse the names of Rhazes, Ali ibn al Abbas and Averroes. His work is not essentially different from that of his predecessor Rhazes, because he presented the doctrine of Galen, and through Galen the doctrine of Hippocrates, modified by the system of Aristotle. But the ''Canon'' of Avicenna is distinguished from the ''Al Hawi'' (Continens) or ''Summary'' of Rhazes by its greater method, due perhaps to the logical studies of the former. The work has been variously appreciated in subsequent ages, some regarding it as a treasury of wisdom, and others, like Averroes, holding it useful only as waste paper. In modern times it has been more criticized than read. The vice of the book is excessive classification of bodily faculties, and over subtlety in the discrimination of diseases. It includes five books of which the first and second treat of physiology, pathology and hygiene, the third and fourth deal with the methods of treating disease, and the fifth describes the composition and preparation of remedies. This last part contains some personal observations. He is, like all his countrymen, ample in the enumeration of symptoms, and is said to be inferior to Ali in practical medicine and surgery. He introduced into medical theory the four causes of the Peripatetic system. Of natural history and botany he pretended to no special knowledge. Up to the year 1650, or thereabouts, the ''Canon'' was still used as a textbook in the universities of Leuven and Montpellier.
Scarcely any member of the Arabian circle of the sciences, including theology, philology, mathematics, astronomy, physics, and music, was left untouched by the treatises of Ibn Sina, many of which probably varied little, except in being commissioned by a different patron and having a different form or extent. He wrote at least one treatise on alchemy, but several others have been falsely attributed to him. His book on animals was translated by Michael Scot. His ''Logic'', ''Metaphysics'', ''Physics'', and ''De Caelo'', are treatises giving a synoptic view of Aristotelian doctrine. The ''Logic'' and ''Metaphysics'' have been printed more than once, the latter, e.g., at Venice in 1493, 1495, and 1546. Some of his shorter essays on medicine, logic, part of it on the ''De Anima'' appeared at Pavia (1490) as the ''Liber Sextus Naturalium'', and the long account of Ibn Sina's philosophy given by Shahrastani seems to be mainly an analysis, and in many places a reproduction, of the Al Shifa'. A shorter form of the work is known as the An najat (''Liberatio''). The Latin editions of part of these works have been modified by the corrections which the monastic editors confess that they applied. There is also a ''Philosophia Orientalis'', mentioned by Roger Bacon, and now lost, which according to Averroes was pantheistic in tone.
In the museum at Bukhara, there are displays showing many of his writings, surgical instruments from the period and paintings of patients undergoing treatment.
In Iran, he is considered a Persian hero. He is often regarded as one of the greatest Persians who have ever lived. Many of his portraits and statues remain in Iran today. An impressive monument to the life and works of the man who is known as the 'doctor of doctors' still stands outside the Bukhara museum and his portrait hangs in the Hall of the Faculty of Medicine in the University of Paris.
Ibn Sina was interested in the effect of the mind on the body, and wrote a great deal on psychology, likely influencing Ibn Tufayl and Ibn Bajjah.
Along with Rhazes, Ibn Nafis, Al Zahra and Al Ibadi, he is considered an important compiler of Early Muslim medicine.
There is a crater on the moon called Avicenna which was named after him.
References
For Ibn Sina's life, see Ibn Khallikan's ''Biographical Dictionary'', translated by de Slane (1842) F. W stenfeld's ''Geschichte der arabischen Aerzte und Naturforscher'' (Gottingen, 1840).
For his medicine, see Sprengel, ''Histoire de la Medecine''
For his philosophy, see
Shahrastani, German translation, vol. ii. 213 332
K. Prantl, ''Geschichte der Logik im Abendland'', ii. 318 361
Albert St ckl, ''Philosophie des Mittelalters'', ii. 3 58
Salomon Munk, ''M langes'', 352 366 B. Haneberg in the ''Abhandungen der philosophische philologisches Classifikation der bayerischen Academie'' (1867)
Carra de Vaux, ''Avicenne'' (Paris, 1900).
For a list of extant works, C. Brockelmann's ''Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur'' (Weimar, 1898), vol. i. pp. 452 458. (XV. W. G. W. T.)
For an overview of his career see Shams Inati, "Ibn Sina" in ''History of Islamic Philosophy'', ed. Hossein Seyyed Nasr and Oliver Leaman, New York:Routledge (1996).
See also
List of Persian scientists
Iranian philosophy
History of medicine
Early Muslim medicine
Muslim philosophy
Islamic scholars
Al Qumri
External links
Source
History of Islamic Philosophy by Henry Corbin
Avicenna
Category:Medieval philosophers
Category:Aristotelian philosophers
Category:Muslim philosophers
Category:Persian philosophers
Category:History of medicine
Category:Alchemists
Category:980 births
Category:1037 deaths
Avicenna
Category: Polymaths
Category:Muslim scientists
als:Ibn Sina
ar:
bg:
bs:Ibn Sina
ca:Avicena
cs:Avicenna
da:Ibn Sina
de:Avicenna
es:Avicena
eo:Aviceno
fa:
fr:Avicenne
gl:Avicena
hr:Ibn Sina
id:Ibnu Sina
it:Avicenna
he:
la:Avicenna
ms:Abu Ali Al Hussain Ibn Abdallah Ibn Sina
nl:Avicenna
ja:
no:Avicenna
pl:Avicenna
pt:Avicena
ro:Avicenna
ru:
sk:Ibn S n Abu Ali
fi:Avicenna
sv:Avicenna
tr: bn i Sina
uk:
zh:
is reputed to contain a set of burnt bails symbolising the death of English cricket.
'''The Ashes''' is a biennial Test cricket contest played between England and Australia. The Ashes is one of cricket's fiercest and most celebrated rivalries, and certainly the oldest such in international cricket, dating back to 1882. The 2005 Ashes series was played in England, and was won by England. Australia had held the Ashes for 16 years prior to that. The next Ashes series will be in Australia in 2006 07 the next series in England will be in 2009.
The series is named after a satirical obituary published in ''The Sporting Times'' in 1882 following the match at The Oval, in which Australia beat England in England for the first time. The obituary stated that English cricket had died, and ''the body will be cremated and the ashes taken to Australia''. The English media dubbed the next English tour to Australia as ''the quest to regain The Ashes''. A small terracotta urn was presented to the England captain Ivo Bligh by a group of Melbourne women after England's victory in the Test series. The urn is reputed to contain a set of burnt bails symbolising "the ashes of English cricket". While the urn has come to symbolise the Ashes series, the name ''The Ashes'' predates the existence of the urn. The urn is not used as a trophy for the Ashes series, and whichever side "holds" the Ashes, the urn remains in the MCC Museum at Lord's. Since the 1998 99 Ashes series, a Waterford crystal trophy has been presented to the winners.
Notable Ashes series took place in 1932 33 (the Bodyline tour), 1948 (Sir Donald Bradman's "Invincibles" Australian side), 1981 (in which an England team spearheaded by Ian Botham won a thrilling series), and 2005 (when England eventually won the Ashes back, after a 'drought' of 16 years).
The obituary
The first Test match between England and Australia had been played in 1877, but the Ashes legend dates back only to their ninth Test match, played in 1882.
On the 1882 tour, the Australians played only one Test, at The Oval in London. It was a low scoring game on a difficult pitch. Australia made only 63 runs in their first innings, and England, led by Monkey Hornby, took a 38 run lead with a total of 101. In the second innings, Australia made 122, leaving England to score only 85 runs to win. Australian bowler Fred Spofforth refused to give in, declaring, "This thing can be done". He devastated the English batting, taking the final four wickets while conceding only two runs, to leave England a mere seven runs short of victory in one of the closest and most nail biting finishes in cricket history.
When England's last batsman went in the team needed only 10 runs to win, but the final batsman Peate scored only 2 before being bowled by Boyle. The astonished crowd fell silent, not believing that England could possibly have lost by 7 runs. When what had happened had sunk in, the crowd cheered the Australians.
When Peate returned to the Pavilion he was reprimanded by WG Grace for not allowing his partner at the wicket Charles Studd to get the runs. Despite Studd being one of the best batsman in England, Peate replied, "I had no confidence in Mr Studd, sir, so thought I had better do my best."
The defeat was widely recorded in the English press. The most notable report was a mock obituary, written by Reginald Shirley Brooks, printed in ''The Sporting Times'' on the following Saturday, September 2 1882. The obituary read as follows:
:"In Affectionate Remembrance of ENGLISH CRICKET, which died at the Oval on 29thAUGUST, 1882, Deeply lamented by a large circle of sorrowing friends and acquaintances R.I.P.
:N.B. The body will be cremated and the ashes taken to Australia."
The English media played up the subsequent tour to Australia in 1882 83 (which had been arranged before this defeat) as a quest to "regain the Ashes".
The Ashes urn
After the third game of the 1882 83 tour, the English team, led by Ivo Bligh were guests of Sir William Clarke, at his property "Rupertswood" at Sunbury, Victoria. A group of Victorian ladies headed by Lady Clarke burned what has variously been called a ball, bail or veil , and presented the resulting ashes to Bligh in an urn together with a velvet bag, which was made by Mrs Ann Fletcher, the daughter of Joseph Hines Clarke and Marion Wright, both of Dublin. She said, "What better way than to actually present the English captain with the very 'object' albeit mythical he had come to Australia to retrieve?" Bligh later married another of these Melburnian ladies, Florence Morphy. When he died in 1927, his widow presented the urn to the Marylebone Cricket Club. The urn itself is made of terracotta and is about fourinches (10cm) tall.
A poem was presented to Bligh with the urn and appears on it :
:''When Ivo goes back with the urn, the urn ''
:''Studds, Steel, Read and Tylecote return, return ''
:''The welkin will ring loud,''
:''The great crowd will feel proud,''
:''Seeing Barlow and Bates with the urn, the urn ''
:''And the rest coming home with the urn.''
The Ashes urn itself is never physically awarded to either England or Australia, but is kept permanently in the MCC Cricket Museum at Lord's Cricket Ground, where it can be seen together with a specially made red and gold velvet bag and the scorecard of the 1882 match.
The urn has been back to Australia once, in 1988 for a museum tour as part of Australia's Bicentennial celebrations. In the 1990s, given Australia's long dominance of the Ashes series, the idea was mooted that the victorious team in an Ashes series should be awarded the urn as a trophy and allowed to retain it until the next series. The MCC, considering the urn too fragile to transport to Australia, instead began commissioning a larger scale replica trophy in Waterford Crystal to award to the winning team of each series.
In 2002, Bligh's great great grandson (Lord Clifton, the heir apparent to the Earldom of Darnley) argued that the Ashes urn should not be returned to Australia as it was essentially the property of his family and only given to the MCC for safe keeping.
The matches
''See also: List of Ashes series for a full listing of all the Ashes series since 1882.''
First Ashes quest
''See also: History of Test cricket (to 1883): The Ashes legend''
The Honourable Ivo Bligh led the expedition to Australia to "recover the Ashes" against the side that had beaten England earlier in 1882. Publicity surrounding the series was intense, and it was at some time during this series that the Ashes urn was crafted. Australia won the first Test by nine wickets, but in the next two England were victorious. At the end of the third Test, the four inch urn was presented to Bligh by some Melburnian ladies, England having been generally considered to have "won back the Ashes" 21. A fourth match was in fact played, against a "United Australian XI", which was stronger than the Australian side that had competed in the previous matches this game, however, is not considered part of the Ashes series.
English dominance ends
After this series followed an extended period of English dominance. The tours were shorter in the 1880s and 1890s than people have grown accustomed to in more recent years, possibly owing to the extended travelling time (the sea journey between the two countries took at least a month). Thus, England only lost four Ashes Tests in the 1880s, out of 23 played, and they won all the seven series contested. There was also more chopping and changing in the teams, there was no official board of selectors for each country (at times, two competing sides toured a nation), and popularity with the fans varied. The 1890s games were more closely fought, Australia taking their first series win since the match that sparked the legend in 1891 92 with a 21 victory. England still dominated, winning the next three series despite continued player disputes. Towards the end of the decade, though, the Australians got more of a foothold, winning four successive series from 1897 98 to 1902.
Repopularising of the Ashes
After what the MCC saw as the problems of the earlier professional and amateur series, they decided to take control of organising tours themselves, and this led to the first MCC tour of Australia in 1903 1904. England won it against the odds, and Plum Warner, the England captain, wrote up his version of the tour in his book ''How We Recovered The Ashes''. This book repopularised the Ashes myth in England, which continues to this day.
England and Australia shared the spoils for the next few years. The entrance of South Africa onto the world cricketing scene meant less time for Ashes series, but even so there were four played after Plum Warner's series, each of the sides taking two victories. England won the last series in 1911 1912 by four matches to one, Sir Jack Hobbs establishing himself as a regular with three centuries. England then retained the Ashes when they won the Triangular tournament, which also featured South Africa, in 1912. England looked as if they had established themselves as the dominating force by the time World War I intervened and brought a halt to all international cricket.
After the war, however, Australia took firm control of both the Ashes and world cricket. They recorded thumping victories both in England and on home soil, and England only won one Test out of fifteen from the end of the war until 1925. In a rain hit series in 1926, however, England managed to eke out a 10 victory with a win in the final Test at the Oval, and despite the appearance of Donald Bradman, Australia could not win the next series either, losing 41. Bradman won the next series almost by himself, however, as one of the best batting line ups of all time began to form in the early 1930s, including Bradman himself, Stan McCabe and Bill Ponsford. It was the prospect of bowling at this line up that caused England's captain Douglas Jardine to think up the Bodyline tactic.
Bodyline
evades a ball from Harold Larwood with Bodyline field settings.
In 1932, after Bradman's routing of the English team in the previous series, Douglas Jardine developed a tactic of instructing his fast bowlers to bowl at the bodies of the Australian batsmen, with the goal of forcing them to defend their bodies with their bats, and provide easy catches to a stacked leg side field. The tactic was descriptively dubbed Bodyline. Although this won England the Ashes, it caused such a furore in Australia that diplomats had to intervene to prevent serious harm to Anglo Australian relations, and the MCC eventually changed the laws of cricket to prevent anyone from using the tactic again.
Jardine's comments summed up England's views: "I've not travelled 6,000miles to make friends. I'm here to win the Ashes."
On the batting friendly wickets that prevailed in the late 1930s, most Tests up to the war still gave results, although many batting records were set in this era. Len Hutton scored 364 at The Oval to save a draw in the 1938 series, a world record innings, while Jack Fingleton and Bradman set a sixth wicket partnership record of 346 runs in the Third Test at Melbourne that stands to this day. The series were surprisingly competitive, though, considering England's desperation in the early 30s.
''The Invincibles''
Australia's first tour of England after World War II, in 1948, was led by the 39 year old Bradman in his last appearance representing Australia. His team has gone down in cricketing legend as ''The Invincibles'', as they played 36 matches including five Tests, and remained unbeaten on the tour. They won 27 matches, drawing only 9, including of course the 40 Ashes series victory.
This series is also known for one of the most poignant moments in cricket history, as Bradman batted for Australia in the fifth Test at The Oval his last needing to score only 4 runs to maintain a career batting average of 100. Eric Hollies bowled him second ball for a duck, denying those 4 runs and sending Bradman into retirement with a career average of 99.94.
Australia gradually weakened after 1948, allowing England back into the fray in the early 1950s when they won three successive Ashes series, from 1953 to 1956 to be arguably the best Test side in the world at the time. A see sawing series in 1956 also saw a record that will probably never be beaten: the spinner Jim Laker's monumental effort at Old Trafford when he bowled 68 of 191 overs to take nineteen out of twenty possible Australian wickets. Never has the phrase "He won the match single handedly" been more appropriate. England's dominance was not to last, however. Australia thumped them 40 when they next toured in 1958 59, having found a good bowler of their own in Richie Benaud who took 31 wickets in the 5 Test series. England failed to win any series during the 1960s, a period dominated by draws as teams found it more prudent to save face with a draw than risk losing. Of a total of 25 Ashes Tests playing during this decade, Australia won seven and England three.
In the first series of the 1970s, however, England managed to win 20, much thanks to the efforts of Geoffrey Boycott who scored four fifties and three centuries in the series, but in the mid 1970s Australia regained ascendancy with fast bowler Dennis Lillee taking English wickets all too consistently. However, both teams had their victories, England enjoying an emphatic 51 win in 1978 79 while Australia took a non Ashes series (with the WSC players returning) 30 a year later. Most would say that the two sides were evenly matched, but no one knew just how evenly they would be matched in the next one.
Botham's Ashes
Australia took a 10 lead in the first two Tests of the 1981 series, and looked to make it 20 in the third Test at Headingley when they forced England to follow on 227 runs behind. Famously, an English bookmaker offered odds of 5001 for an English victory, and Australian players Dennis Lillee and Rod Marsh laid a small bet. This came back to haunt them as England, reduced to 135 for 7 wickets, produced a second innings of 356, Ian Botham scoring an unbeaten 149, and adding 221 for the last three wickets in partnerships with Graham Dilley, Chris Old and their fast bowler Bob Willis. Chasing 130, Australia were dismissed for 111, with a devastating spell of 843 by Willis giving England a miraculous victory by 18 runs. Lillee and Marsh were reprimanded for betting on the outcome of a game, but not suspended.
The fourth Test at Edgbaston was a similarly inspired comeback victory for England. Ian Botham this time starred with the ball, taking five for 11, including a spell of five wickets for a solitary run, in Australia's second innings of 121 to give England victory by 29 runs. England also went on to win the fifth Test at Old Trafford to retain the Ashes the sixth Test at the Oval was drawn.
Australian dominance
England were the better team of the early 1980s, although it was close: Australia won the 1982 83 series, but England then took two victories in 1985 and 1986 87. After those wins, however, a period of extended Australian dominance began, and England did not win an Ashes series again until 2005. Australia won the 1989 series 40, and an England side weakened by Test bans following the Gatting tour to apartheid South Africa lost 30 in 1990 91. The Australians underlined their superiority in the contest by winning the 1993, 1994 95, 1997, 1998 99 and 2001 series all by convincing margins.
Australia's record since 1989 has impacted upon the overall statistics between the two sides. Before the 1989 series began, Australia had won 36.9 of all Tests played against England, England 33.5 with 29.7 of matches ending in draws. Previous to the 2005 series, Australia had won 40.8 of all Tests, England 31 with 28.1 drawn.
In the period between 1989 and the beginning of the 2005 series, the two sides had played 43 times. Australia winning 28 times, England 7 times, with 8 draws.
Steve Waugh's last Ashes
After playing in nine successive Ashes series, the 2002 03 rubber was to be Australian captain Steve Waugh's last against England, and was to prove one of the most emphatic victories he enjoyed against the English. The series began with what many regard in hindsight as one of the worst captaincy decisions of all time, as Nasser Hussain won the toss for England in the first Test and sent Australia in to bat. By the end of the first day, Australia had amassed a staggering 364 2, and placed a stamp of authority on the series that would not be undone as they raced to victory by 384 runs. This was followed by two innings victories to Australia, and a fairly comfortable five wicket win. England only managed to save some face with a 225 run victory in the final Test.
The series' most memorable moment came on the second day of the Fifth Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground. Leading into the match Waugh had been heavily scrutinised by selectors and the media over his advancing age and lack of recent form, having not posted a Test century since 2001. As this was the last match of the series and last Test of the Australian summer, Waugh was likely to be dropped from the team if he failed again in this match. Asked before the match about the defining moment of a career likely to soon be over, Waugh predicted gamely "It might be yet to come." In a stunning display of determination and defiance, he then fulfilled this prophesy by scoring a chanceless century on the second afternoon. He had entered the final over of the day on 95 not out, and hit a boundary off the last ball (bowled by English off spinner Richard Dawson) to bring up his ton. Waugh left the ground to an emotional standing ovation, his Test career saved. It came to be known as his 'Perfect Day'.
The 2005 series
England were undefeated in Test matches in the 2004 calendar year, which took the team to second in the LG ICC Test Championship and raised hopes that the 2005 Ashes series would be closely fought. In fact, the series proved to be even more competitive than most commentators had predicted.
The first Test was played at Lord's from 21 July to 24 July, and was won convincingly by Australia by 239 runs. However, England fought back in the remaining four matches, which were all tense and closely fought. The second Test, played at Edgbaston from 4 August to 7 August was won by England by 2 runs, the smallest runs victory margin in Ashes history, and the second closest runs victory margin in all Tests. The rain affected third Test, played at Old Trafford from 11 August to 15 August, ended with the final two Australian batsmen holding out to claim a draw. The fourth Test, played at Trent Bridge from 25 August to 28 August, was won by England by three wickets after Australia was forced to follow on for the first time in 191 Tests. England earned a draw at the fifth and final Test match, played at The Oval from 8 September to 12 September, to win an Ashes series for the first time in 18 years.
From the start the 2005 Ashes series was played at a very high intensity and the tension did occasionally lead to mistakes on both sides with many dropped catches, run outs and other errors. Australia were unlucky with the injury to a key bowler Glenn McGrath (who missed the two matches when Australia was beaten) and the loss of form of others such as Jason Gillespie, Adam Gilchrist and Matthew Hayden, whereas England were able to pick the same eleven until Simon Jones sustained an ankle injury midway through the Fourth Test, forcing him out of the series decider. However many consider the series to have been the most exciting in living memory, providing enthralling viewing to those lucky enough to get the very scarce tickets for the matches, or those watching on television. Respected commentator Richie Benaud is reported by BBC correspondent Bob Chaundry as having said: "In the past two years, I've seen the best cricket I've ever watched. This current Ashes series shades even the great one of 1981."
At the end of the series, Andrew Flintoff was awarded the inaugural Compton Miller medal as the player of the series for his batting and bowling efforts. Flintoff was also chosen as "Man of the Series" by the Australian coach and his English counterpart chose Shane Warne, who took 40 wickets in the five matches and batted skilfully down the order.
England will travel to Australia in the winter of 2006 2007 in the hope to retain the Ashes.
Summary of results and statistics
:''See also: List of Ashes series for a full listing of all the Ashes series since 1882.''
thumb 200px Chart of the matches won between the two sides.
A team must win a series to gain the right to hold the Ashes. A drawn series results in the previous holders retaining the Ashes. To date, a total of 62 Ashes series have been played with Australia winning 30, England winning 27. The remaining five series were drawn, with Australia retaining the Ashes four times and England retaining it once.
Ashes series have generally been played over five Test matches, although there have been four match series (1938 1975) and six match series (1970 71 1974 75 1978 79 1981 1985 1989 1993 and 1997). 293 matches have been played, with Australia winning 115 times, England 92 times, and 86 draws. Australians have made 264 centuries in Ashes Tests, twenty three of them over 200, while Englishmen have scored 212 centuries, of which ten have been scores over 200. On 41 occasions, individual Australians have taken ten wickets in a match. Englishmen have performed that feat 38 times.
The Ashes today
The Ashes is one of the most fiercely contested competitions in cricket today, rivalling the intensity of the other great international cricket rivalry between India and Pakistan . The failure of England to regain the Ashes for 16 years from 1989, coupled with the global dominance of the Australian team, had dulled the lustre of the series in recent years. But the close results in the 2005 Ashes series, and the overall high quality and competitiveness of the cricket, have boosted the popularity of the sport in Britain and considerably enhanced the profile of the Ashes around the world. Whilst the tension of the matches has caused an occasional angry moment, the matches were generally played with good spirit, and sportsmanship of the players of both sides has been high, with commentators often highlighting Andrew Flintoff consoling Brett Lee at the end of the second Test as epitomising this. In interviews following the final match, players from both sides were quick to congratulate their opponents, both the individual players and the team as a whole.
Match venues
The series alternate between England and Australia, and within each country each of the (usually) five matches is held at a different cricket ground.
In '''Australia''', the grounds currently used are the Melbourne Cricket Ground (first staged an England Australia Test in the 1876 77 season), the Sydney Cricket Ground (1881 82), Adelaide Oval (1884 85), The Gabba (1932 33) and The WACA, Perth (1970 71). One Test was held at the Brisbane Exhibition Ground in 1928 29.
In '''England''' the grounds used are The Oval (since 1880), Old Trafford (1884), Lord's (1884), Trent Bridge (1899), Headingley (1899) and Edgbaston (1902). One Test was held at Bramall Lane, Sheffield in 1902.
The Ashes outside cricket
The popularity and reputation of the cricket series has led to many other events taking the name for England against Australia contests. The best known and longest running of these events is the rugby league contest between Great Britain and Australia (see Rugby League Ashes). The contest first started in 1908, the name being suggested by the touring Australians. Another example is in the British television show ''Gladiators'', where two series were based around the AustraliaEngland contest.
The trophy is also featured in the science fiction comedy novel ''Life, the Universe and Everything'', the third "Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy" book by Douglas Adams.
In the cinema, the Ashes featured in the film ''The Final Test'', released in 1953, based on a television play by Terence Rattigan. It stars Jack Warner as an England cricketer playing the last Test of his career, which is the last of an Ashes series the film contains cameo appearances from prominent contemporary Ashes cricketers including Jim Laker and Denis Compton.
See also
History of Test cricket (to 1883)
History of Test cricket (1884 to 1889)
History of Test cricket (1890 to 1900)
Portal:Cricket for more coverage of all things Cricket.
Notes
In 1998, Lord Darnley s 82 year old daughter in law said they were the remains of her mother in law s veil, not a bail. Other evidence suggests a ball. The precise origin of the ashes, therefore, is the subject of some dispute.
,
Statistics obtained from Cricinfo at
Statistics obtained from Cricinfo at
Bob Chaundry (2005) "So Long Sport", ''BBC News Magazine'' online br Available from: http: news.bbc.co.uk 1 hi magazine 4227822.stm. Accessed 14 September 2005 .
References
'''Other'''
''Wisden's Cricketers Almanack'' (various editions)
External links
Crowd sounds and interviews with supporters. Recorded at The Oval, London, Monday, 12 September 2005
Ashes, The
Ashes, The
Ashes, The
Ashes, The
Ashes, The
Ashes
Ashes, The
de:Ashes
fr:Les Ashes
scn:The Ashes
sv:The Ashes
'''Anne Rice''' (born October 4, 1941) is a best selling American author of horror fantasy books. She was born '''Howard Allen O'Brien''', the second daughter in a Catholic Irish American family. Rice's works have had a major influence on the "Goth" movement, and she has also published a number of works with sado masochistic themes. She was married to the late poet Stan Rice and is the mother of novelist Christopher Rice. Her daughter, Michele, was born on September 21, 1966 and died of leukemia on August 5 1972. Anne's sister, Alice Borchardt, is also a noted genre author.
Rice was born and spent most of her life in New Orleans, Louisiana, the city that forms the background against which most of her stories take place. About her unusual given name, Rice said: "My birth name is Howard Allen because apparently my mother thought it was a good idea to name me Howard. My father's name was Howard, she wanted to name me after Howard, and she thought it was a very interesting thing to do. She was a bit of a Bohemian, a bit of mad woman, a bit of a genius, and a great deal of a great teacher. And she had the idea that naming a woman Howard was going to give that woman an unusual advantage in the world. "
Anne became "Anne" on her first day of school, when a nun asked her what her name was. She blurted out "Anne" immediately, and her mother, who was with her, let it go without correcting her, knowing how self conscious her daughter was of her real name
Known for her avid interest in art and culture, Anne and her family occasionally took trips overseas to study the art later mentioned in her stories. More recently, following the death of her husband Stan Rice, she has relocated to the Coachella Valley, California area to be nearer her son, Christopher. After spending most of her adult life as a self described atheist, Rice returned to the Roman Catholic Church in 1998, and she is currently working on a trilogy about the life of Jesus.
Rice has also published erotica under the pen names '''Anne Rampling''' and '''A.N. Roquelaure''', the latter of which was used primarily for more adult oriented material. Her fiction is often described as lush and descriptive, and her characters' sexuality is fluid, often displaying homoerotic feelings towards each other. She also deals with philosophical and historic themes, weaving them in to the dense pattern of her books, and giving them a highly intellectual, if not highly literary, content. To her admirers, Rice's books are among the best in modern popular fiction, considered by some to possess those elements that create a lasting presence in the literary canon. To her critics, her novels are baroque, "low brow pulp" and redundant.
A critical analysis of Rice's work can be found in S. T. Joshi's book ''The Modern Weird Tale'' (2001).
Conversion to a Christian Novelist
In October of 2005, Rice announced in a that she would "write only for the Lord". Her first novel in the genre is called ''Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt'' and is the first in a trilogy that will chronicle the life of Christ.
The Vampire Chronicles
She completed her first book, ''Interview with the Vampire'', in 1973 and published it in 1976.
''Interview with the Vampire'' can also be viewed as an example of psychedelic literature. Rice herself has denied ever having experimented with LSD. "I'm a totally conservative person. In the middle of Haight Ashbury in the 1960s, I was typing away while everybody was dropping acid and smoking grass. I was known as my own square." (''New York Times'', Nov 7, 1988) Her protagonist Louis, however, describes a heightened awareness after being transformed into a vampire which does mirror the LSD experience to some extent.
Rice has said that Claudia, the young girl in the book, was inspired by her late daughter.
Film Adaptations
In 1994, Neil Jordan directed a motion picture adaption of Interview with the Vampire, based on the story, but with some minor changes. A second movie was later made, inspired by the second and third books in the original ''Vampire Chronicles'' series. The title was that of the third book, ''The Queen of the Damned''. The storyline chosen by the producers of the second film is controversial among many fans of her books. Major plot points of both books were altered, and it has been rumoured that the second film's theatrical release was based solely on its producers' wish to capitalize on the death of Aaliyah. Another rumor being that Warner Bros. was already into its last year of owning motion picture rights to the first three Vampire Chronicles books, which would then have transferred back to author Anne Rice once this period was over. Once back in her ownership, she could then sell the rights to another company of her choosing. Knowing what little time they had left, despite the fact they've had the rights and opportunity to make the latter two movies for over seven years, Warner Bros. hastily hired writers to condense the books "''The Vampire Lestat''" and "''The Queen of the Damned''" into one movie in order to profit from their initial rights purchase.
A film named ''Exit to Eden'' based loosely on Rice's book of the same name starred Rosie O'Donnell and Dan Aykroyd. The plot was seriously altered, with the work transformed from a love story into a police comedy, possibly due to the explicit S M nature of the book.
Health
Rice has Type 1 diabetes. This was discovered when she went into a diabetic coma in December 1998. She is an advocate for people to get tested for diabetes. Because of a lifelong battle with her weight as well as depression due to the long illness and subsequent death of her husband, Rice's weight ballooned to 254 pounds. Tired of dealing with sleep apnea, limited mobility, and other weight related problems, she had gastric bypass surgery on January 15 , 2003.
Leaving New Orleans
On January 30, 2004 Rice announced her plans to leave New Orleans to move the suburb of Jefferson Parish, Louisiana. She had already put the largest of her three homes in Uptown New Orleans up for sale, and plans to sell the other two. She cited living alone since the death of her husband and her son's moving out of state as the reasons. "Simplifying my life, not owning so much, that's the chief goal", said Rice. "I'll no longer be a citizen of New Orleans in the true sense."
In spring 2005 Anne Rice moved to La Jolla, California. She calls her new home "Paradise West". Some have speculated that Rice also wished for more privacy from the constant attentions of her fans, who were known to camp out in front of her house. Sometimes, up to 200 or more would gather to see her leave for church on Sundays.
Fanfiction Stance
Rice is very adamant about preventing any fan fiction of her books on April 7, 2000, she released a statement on her website that prohibited all fanfiction involving her work. This caused the removal of thousands of fanfics from the popular Fanfiction.Net website.
Amazon incident
On September 6, 2004, Rice posted a reply to a number of negative reviews that had appeared on Amazon.com regarding ''Blood Canticle''. She titled her reply, This post generated a great deal of publicity online partly because authors rarely post or respond to reviews on Amazon, and partly because of the tone and nature of her text. Many previous reviews had criticized the quality of writing in ''Blood Canticle'' as lazy or shoddy so when Rice replied by posting a 1,200 word paragraph wherein she proudly dismisses the utility of editors, the incident became fodder for weblogs and Internet sites.
Books
'''The Vampire Chronicles:'''
''Interview with the Vampire'' (1976)
''The Vampire Lestat'' (1985)
''The Queen of the Damned'' (1988)
''The Tale of the Body Thief'' (1992)
''Memnoch The Devil'' (1995)
''The Vampire Armand'' (1998)
''Merrick'' (2000)
''Blood and Gold'' (2001)
''Blackwood Farm'' (2002)
''Blood Canticle'' (2003)
'''New Tales of the Vampires:''' ''(Other vampire tales that are not within the main sequence, but in the same fictional world)''
''Pandora'' (1998)
''Vittorio the Vampire'' (1999)
'''Lives of The Mayfair Witches:'''
''The Witching Hour'' (1990)
''Lasher'' (1993)
''Taltos'' (1994)
'''Single Novels:'''
''The Feast of All Saints'' (1979)
''Cry to Heaven'' (1982)
''The Mummy'', or ''Ramses the Damned'' (1989)
''Servant of the Bones'' (1996)
''Violin'' (1997)
'''The Christ Series:'''
''Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt'' (2005) Anne has suggested that there will be three sequels to this work
'''Short Fiction:'''
''October 4th, 1948''
''Nicholas and Jean''
''The Master of Rampling Gate'' (Vampire Story)
'''Work written under the pseudonym Anne Rampling:'''
''Exit to Eden'' (1985)
''Belinda'' (1986)
'''Erotica written under the pseudonym A. N. Roquelaure:'''
''The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty'' (1983)
''Beauty's Punishment'' (1984)
''Beauty's Release'' (1985)
See also
List of bestselling novels in the United States
External links
(regarding Hurricane Katrina)
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
Rice, Anne
bg:
da:Anne Rice
de:Anne Rice
es:Anne Rice
fr:Anne Rice
is:Anne Rice
it:Anne Rice
nl:Anne Rice
ja:
no:Anne Rice
pl:Anne Rice
pt:Anne Rice
fi:Anne Rice
sv:Anne Rice
'''Analysis''' generally means ''the action of taking something apart in order to study it.''
It may refer to:
In '''philosophy''':
Philosophical analysis, a general term for the techniques used by philosophers
''ANALYSIS'' is the name of a prominent journal in philosophy.
In '''mathematics''':
Mathematical analysis, the generic name given to any branch of mathematics which depends upon the concepts of limits and convergence
Complex analysis
Functional analysis
Harmonic analysis
Non standard analysis
Real analysis
In '''statistics''':
Analysis of variance, a collection of statistical models and their associated procedures which compare means by splitting the overall observed variance into different parts
Meta analysis, combines the results of several studies that address a set of related research hypotheses
Time series analysis, methods that attempt to understand a sequence of data points spaced apart at uniform time intervals
In '''computer science''':
Analysis of algorithms
Competitive analysis, shows how on line algorithms perform and demonstrates the power of randomization in algorithms
Computer program analysis, the process of automatically analysing the behavior of computer programs
Lexical analysis, the process of procesing an input sequence of characters and producing as output a sequence of symbols
Numerical analysis, the study of algorithms for the problems of continuous mathematics
Object oriented analysis and design, ala Booch
Semantic analysis (computer science)
Static code analysis, the analysis of computer software that is performed without actually executing programs built from that software
Structured Systems Analysis and Design Methodology, ala Yourdon
Syntax analysis, a process in compilers that recognizes the structure of programming languages, also known as parsing
In '''music''':
Musical analysis, a process attempting to answer the question "how does this music work?"
Schenkerian analysis
In '''psychotherapy''':
Psychoanalysis, seeks to elucidate connections among unconscious components of patients' mental processes
Transactional analysis
In '''cryptography''':
Cryptanalysis, the study of methods for obtaining the meaning of encrypted information
Frequency analysis, a method to decompose a function, wave, or signal into its frequency components
In '''economics''':
Financial analysis, the analysis of the accounts and the economic prospects of a firm
Fundamental analysis, a stock valuation method that uses financial analysis
Principal components analysis, a technique that can be used to simplify a dataset
Technical analysis, the study of price action in securities markets in order to forecast future prices
In '''linguistics''':
Discourse analysis, a general term for the analysis of language use above the sentence or clause level
Semantic analysis (linguistics), the process of unpacking clause, sentence and paragraph structure
Voice analysis, the study of speech sounds for purposes other than linguistic content
In '''signal processing''':
Finite element analysis, a computer simulation technique used in engineering analysis
Independent component analysis
Link quality analysis, the analysis of signal quality
Path quality analysis
In '''literary criticism''':
Analysis (Homer), an influential school of thought in Homeric scholarship in the 19th 20th centuries
It may also refer to:
Aura analysis, a technique in which supporters of the method claim that the body's aura, or energy field is "analyzed"
Bowling analysis, a notation summarising a cricket bowler's performance
Category analysis
Chemical analysis, the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure
Dimensional analysis, a conceptual tool to understand physical situations involving a mix of different kinds of physical quantities
Isotope analysis, the identification of isotopic signature, the distribution of certain stable isotopes and chemical elements within chemical compounds
Life cycle cost analysis, calculates the cost of a system or product over its entire life span
Lithic analysis, the analysis of stone tools using basic scientific techniques
Neutron activation analysis, a technique used to very accurately determine the concentrations of elements in a sample
Protocol analysis, a means for extracting persons' thoughts while they are performing a task
System analysis, the branch of electrical engineering that characterizes electrical systems and their properties
Systems analysis, the science dealing with analysis of complex, large scale systems and the interactions within those systems
See also
Analytic
Synthesis
Scientific method
cs:Anal za
da:Analyse
de:Analyse
es:An lisis
fr:Analyse
io:Analizo
ko:
lb:Analys
mk:
nl:Analyse
pl:Analiza
simple:Analyse
'''Abner Doubleday''' (June 26, 1819 January 26, 1893), was a career U.S. Army officer and Union general in the American Civil War. He fired the first shot in defense of Fort Sumter, the opening battle of the war. Although he himself made no such claim, some believe he should be credited with the invention of baseball.
Early years
Doubleday was born in Ballston Spa, New York. His grandfather had fought in the Revolutionary War and his father served four years in the U.S. Congress. Abner practiced as a civil engineer for two years before entering the U.S. Military Academy, from which graduated in 1842 and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S. Artillery.
Military career
Doubleday served in the Mexican American War and Seminole Wars. At the start of the Civil War, he was a captain in the garrison at Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor, under Major Robert Anderson. He aimed the cannon that fired the first return shot in answer to the Confederate bombardment on April 12, 1861, starting the war.
Doubleday served in the Shenandoah Valley from June to August, 1861. He was appointed brigadier general of volunteers on February 3, 1862, and led the 2nd Brigade, 1st Division, III Corps at the Second Battle of Bull Run. He took command of the division on August 30 when its commander was wounded. He again led the division at South Mountain, Antietam (where he was wounded by a shell exploding nearby), and Fredericksburg (where his division mostly sat idle).
Doubleday was promoted to major general of volunteers on November 9, 1862, and commanded 3rd Division, I Corps, at Chancellorsville, and took over corps command for a day when General John F. Reynolds was killed in opening of the Battle of Gettysburg, July 9, 1863. Army commander George G. Meade replaced Doubleday with John Newton, a more junior major general from another corps, after the first day of battle, one in which the I Corps was overwhelmed by a Confederate assault. Meade had a long history of disdain for Doubleday's combat effectiveness, dating back to South Mountain. Doubleday was humiliated by this snub and held a lasting grudge against Meade. He was wounded in the neck on the second day of the battle and assumed mostly administrative duties in the defenses of Washington, D.C., including the attack by Jubal A. Early in the Valley Campaigns of 1864.
Later life
After the Civil War, Doubleday retired from the Army in 1873 and moved to San Francisco, where he obtained a charter for the cable car railway that still runs there. By 1878, he was living in Mendham, New Jersey, from where, that year, he became a prominent member of the Theosophical Society. When two of the founders of that society, Helena Blavatsky and Henry Steel Olcott, moved to India at the end of that year, he was constituted as the President of the American body.
Doubleday died in Mendham, and is buried in Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia.
Legacy
Although Doubleday was a competent, if colorless, combat general with experience in many important Civil War battles, the lore of baseball credits Doubleday with inventing the game, supposedly in Elihu Phinney's cow pasture in Cooperstown, New York, in 1839.
The Mills Commission was appointed in 1905 to determine the origin of baseball. The committee's final report, on December 30, 1907, stated, in part, that "the first scheme for playing baseball, according to the best evidence obtainable to date, was devised by Abner Doubleday at Cooperstown, New York, in 1839."
However, there is considerable evidence to dispute this claim. At his death, Doubleday left many letters and papers, none of which describe baseball, or give any suggestion that he considered himself a prominent person in the evolution of the game. An encyclopedia article about Doubleday published in 1911 makes no mention of the game. He was a cadet at West Point in the year of the alleged invention and there is no record he requested leave to travel to Cooperstown.
Doubleday published two important works on the Civil War: ''Reminiscences of Forts Sumter and Moultrie'' (1876), and ''Chancellorsville and Gettysburg'' (1882), the latter being a volume of the series ''Campaigns of the Civil War''.
Doubleday's indecision as a commander earned him the uncomplimentary nickname "Forty Eight Hours".
See also
Origins of baseball
References
Eicher, John H., Eicher, David J., ''Civil War High Commands'', Stanford University Press, 2001, ISBN 0 8047 3641 3.
Tagg, Larry, , Savas Publishing, 1998, ISBN 1 882810 30 9.
External links
Doubleday, Abner
Doubleday, Abner
Doubleday
Doubleday, Abner
Doubleday, Abner
Doubleday, Abner
Doubleday, Abner
'''''Americas National Game''''' is a book by Albert Spalding, published in 1911 detailing the early history of the game of baseball. Much of the story is told first hand, since Spalding had been involved in the game, first as a player and later an administrator, since the 1850s. In addition to his personal recollections he had access to the records of Henry Chadwick, the game's first statistician and archivist. Spalding was, however, known to aggrandise his role in the major moments in baseball's history.
See also: History of baseball
Category:1911 books
'''Amplitude modulation''' ('''AM''') is a form of modulation in which the amplitude of a carrier wave is varied in direct proportion to that of a modulating signal. (Contrast this with frequency modulation, in which the frequency of the carrier is varied and phase modulation, in which the phase is varied.)
AM is commonly used at radio frequencies and was the first method used to broadcast commercial radio. The term "AM" is sometimes used generically to refer to the AM broadcast (mediumwave) band (see AM radio).
Applications in radio
A basic AM radio transmitter works by first DC shifting the modulating signal, then multiplying it with the carrier wave using a frequency mixer. The output of this process is a signal with the same frequency as the carrier but with peaks and troughs that vary in proportion to the strength of the modulating signal. This is amplified and fed to an antenna.
AM vs. FM
AM radio's main limitation is its susceptibility to atmospheric interference, which is heard as static from the receiver. The narrow bandwidth traditionally used for AM broadcasts further limits the quality of sound that can be received. Since the 1970s, wideband FM has been preferred for musical broadcasts, due to its higher audio fidelity and noise suppression characteristics.
The fact that signals can be decoded using very simple equipment is one of the primary advantages of amplitude modulation. This was especially important in the early days of commercial radio, when electronic components were still quite expensive. This simplicity and affordability helped make AM one of the most popular methods for sending voice and music over radio during the 20th century.
An AM receiver consists primarily of a tunable filter and an envelope detector, which in simpler sets is a single diode. Its output is a signal at the carrier frequency, with peaks that trace the amplitude of the unmodulated signal. Unlike other modulation techniques, this is all that is needed to recover the original audio. In practice, a capacitor is used to undo the DC shift introduced by the transmitter and to eliminate the carrier frequency by connecting the signal peaks. The output is then fed to an audio amplifier.
of a simple AM receiver. A diode functions as the envelope detector, with the recovered audio fed directly to an earphone.
To make a good AM receiver an automatic gain control loop is essential this requires good design. To make a good FM receiver a large number of RF amps which are driven into limiting are required to create a receiver which can take advantage of the capture effect, one of the biggest advantages of FM. With valved (tube) systems it is more expensive to make active stages than it is to make the same number of stages with solid state parts, so for a valved superhet it is simpler to make an AM receiver with the automatic gain control loop while for a solid state receiver it is simpler to make an FM unit. Hence even while the idea of FM was known before WWII its use was rare because of the cost of valves in the UK the government had a valve holder tax which encouraged radio receiver designers to use as few active stages as possible, but when solid state parts became available FM started to gain favour. ! By Horst Rebein
Forms of AM
In its basic form, amplitude modulation produces a signal with power concentrated at the carrier frequency and in two adjacent sidebands. Each sideband is equal in bandwidth to that of the modulating signal and is a mirror image of the other. Thus, most of the power output by an AM transmitter is effectively wasted: half the power is concentrated at the carrier frequency, which carries no useful information (beyond the fact that a signal is present) the remaining power is split between two identical sidebands, only one of which is needed.
To increase transmitter efficiency, the carrier can be removed (suppressed) from the AM signal. This produces a reduced carrier transmission or ''double sideband suppressed carrier'' (DSBSC) signal. If the carrier is only partially suppressed, a '''double sideband reduced carrier''' (DSBRC) signal results. DSBSC and DSBRC signals need their carrier to be regenerated (by a beat frequency oscillator, for instance) to be demodulated using conventional techniques.
Even greater efficiency is achievedat the expense of increased transmitter and receiver complexityby completely suppressing both the carrier and one of the sidebands. This is single sideband modulation, widely used in amateur radio due to its efficient use of both power and bandwidth.
A simple form of AM often used for digital communications is ''on off keying'', a type of ''amplitude shift keying'' by which binary data is represented as the presence or absence of a carrier wave. This is commonly used at radio frequencies to transmit Morse code, referred to as continuous wave (CW) operation.
Example
Suppose we wish to modulate a simple sine wave on a carrier wave. The equation for the carrier wave of frequency math omega c math, taking its phase to be a reference phase of zero, is
:mathc(t) C sin( omega c t) math.
The equation for the simple sine wave of frequency math omega m math (the signal we wish to broadcast) is
:mathm(t) M sin( omega m t phi) math,
with math phi math its phase offset relative to mathc(t) math.
Amplitude modulation is performed simply by adding mathm(t) math to mathC math. The amplitude modulated signal is then
:mathy(t) (C M sin( omega m t phi)) sin( omega c t) math
The formula for mathy(t) math above may be written
:mathy(t) C sin( omega c t) M frac cos( phi ( omega m omega c) t) 2 M frac cos( phi ( omega m omega c) t) 2 math
The broadcast signal consists of the carrier wave plus two sinusoidal waves each with a frequency slightly different from math omega c math, known as sidebands. For the sinusoidal signals used here, these are at math omega c omega m math and math omega c omega m math. As long as the broadcast (carrier wave) frequencies are sufficiently spaced out so that these side bands do not overlap, stations will not interfere with one another.
A more general example
:''This relies on knowledge of the Fourier Transform. The discussion of the figure may prove more useful for a quicker understanding.''
Consider a general modulating signal mathm(t) math, which can now be anything at all. The same basic rules apply:
:math ,y(t) C m(t) cos( omega c t) math.
Or, in complex form:
:mathy(t) C m(t) frac e j omega c t e j omega c t 2 math
Taking Fourier Transforms, we get:
:math Y( omega) pi C delta( omega omega c) frac 1 2 M( omega omega c) pi C delta( omega omega c) frac 1 2 M( omega omega c) math,
where math delta(x) math is the Dirac delta function a unit impulse at mathx math and capital functions indicate Fourier Transforms.
This has two components: one at positive frequencies (centered on math omega c math) and one at negative frequencies (centered on math omega c math). There is nothing mathematically wrong with negative frequencies, and they need to be considered here otherwise one of the sidebands will be missing. Shown below is a graphical representation of the above equation. It shows the modulating signal's spectrum on top, followed by the full spectrum of the modulated signal.
This makes clear the two sidebands that this modulation method yields, as well as the carrier signals that go with them. The carrier signals are the impulses. Clearly, an AM signal's spectrum consists of its original (2 sided) spectrum shifted up to the carrier frequency. The negative frequencies are a mathematical nicety, but are essential since otherwise we would be missing the lower sideband in the original spectrum!
As already mentioned, if multiple signals are to be transmitted in this way (by frequency division multiplexing), then their carrier signals must be sufficiently separated that their spectra do not overlap. This analysis also shows that the transmission bandwidth of AM is twice the signal's original (baseband) bandwidth since both the positive and negative sidebands are 'copied' up to the carrier frequency, but only the positive sideband is present originally. Thus, double sideband AM (DS AM) is spectrally inefficient. The various suppression methods in Forms of AM, can be seen clearly in the figure with the carrier suppressed there will be no impulses and with a sideband suppressed, the transmission bandwidth is reduced back to the original, baseband, bandwidth a significant improvement in spectrum usage.
An analysis of the power consumption of AM reveals that DS AM with its carrier has an efficiency of about 33 very poor. The forms of AM with suppressed carriers are found to be 100 power efficient, since no power is wasted on the carrier signal which conveys no information.
Modulation index
As with other modulation indices, in AM, this quantity, also called ''modulation depth'', indicates by how much the modulated variable varies around its 'original' level. For AM, it relates to the variations in the carrier amplitude and is defined as:
:mathh frac mathrm peak value of m(t) C math.
So if mathh 0.5 math, the carrier amplitude varies by 50 above and below its unmodulated level, and for mathh 1.0 math it varies by 100 . Modulation depth greater than 100 is generally to be avoided practical transmitter systems will usually incorporate some kind of limiter circuit, such as a VOGAD, to ensure this.
Variations of modulated signal with percentage modulation are shown below. In each image, the maximum amplitude is higher than in the previous image. Note that the scale changes from one image to the next.
center center
Amplitude modulator designs
Circuits
A wide range of different circuits have been used for AM, but one of the simplest circuits uses anode or collector modulation applied via a transformer. While it is perfectly possible to create good designs using solid state electronics, valved (tube) circuits are shown here. In general, valves are able to easily yield RF powers far in excess of what can be achieved using solid state. Most high power broadcast stations still use valves.
is supplied with an anode supply (and screen grid supply) which is modulated via the transformer. The resistor R1 sets the grid bias, both the input and outputs are tuned LC circuits which are tapped into by inductive coupling
Modulation circuit designs can be broadly divided into low and high level.
Low level
Here a small audio stage is used to modulate a low power stage, the output of this stage is then amplified using a linear RF amplifier.
Advantages
The advantage of using a linear RF amplifier is that the smaller early stages can be modulated, which only requires a small audio amplifier to drive the modulator.
Disadvantages
The great disadvantage of this system is that the amplifer chain is less efficient, because it has to be linear to preserve the modulation. Hence Class C amplifiers cannot be employed.
An approach which marries the advantages of low level modulation with the efficiency of a Class C power amplifier chain is to arrange a feedback system to compensate for the substantial distortion of the AM envelope. A simple detector at the transmitter output (which can be little more than a loosely coupled diode) recovers the audio signal, and this is used as negative feedback to the audio modulator stage. The overall chain then acts as a linear amplifier as far as the actual modulation is concerned, though the RF amplifier itself still retains the Class C efficiency. This approach is widely used in practical medium power transmitters, such as AM radiotelephones.
High level
Advantages
One advantage of using class C amplifiers in a broadcast AM transmitter is that only the final stage needs to be modulated, and that all the earlier stages can be driven at a constant level. These class C stages will be able to generate the drive for the final stage for a smaller DC power input. However in many designs in order to obtain better quality AM the penultimate RF stages will need to be subject to modulation as well as the final stage.
Disadvantages
A large audio amplifer will be needed for the modulation stage, at least equal to the power of the transmitter output itself. Traditionally the modulation is applied using an audio transformer, and this can be bulky. Direct coupling from the audio amplifier is also possible (known as a cascode arrangement), though this usually requires quite a high DC supply voltage (say 30V or more), which is not suitable for mobile units.
See also
AM radio also referred to as Mediumwave
shortwave radio almost universally uses AM modulation, narrow FM occurring above 25 MHz.
Modulation, for a list of other modulation techniques
AMSS Amplitude Modulation Signalling System, a digital system for adding low bitrate information to an AM signal.
Sideband, for some explanation of what this is.
References
Newkirk, David and Karlquist, Rick (2004). Mixers, modulators and demodulators. In D. G. Reed (ed.), ''The ARRL Handbook for Radio Communications'' (81st ed.), pp. 15.115.36. Newington: ARRL. ISBN 0 87259 196 4.
Category:Radio modulation modes
de:Amplitudenmodulation
es:Amplitud Modulada
fr:Modulation d'amplitude
ko:
he:
nl:Amplitudemodulatie
ja:
no:Amplitudemodulasjon
pl:Modulacja amplitudy
pt:Modula o em Amplitude
fi:AM
zh:
:''For the lighting instrument, see Fresnel lantern.
'''Augustin Jean Fresnel''' (pronounced in AmE, in French) (May 10, 1788 July 14, 1827), was a French physicist who contributed significantly to the establishment of the theory of wave optics. Fresnel studied the behaviour of light both theoretically and experimentally.
Biography
Fresnel was the son of an architect, born at Broglie (Eure). His early progress in learning was slow, and he still could not read when he was eight years old. At thirteen he entered the cole Centrale in Caen, and at sixteen and a half the cole Polytechnique, where he acquitted himself with distinction. From there he went to the cole des Ponts et Chauss es. He served as an engineer successively in the departments of Vend e, Dr me and Ille et Vilaine but having supported the Bourbons in 1814 he lost his appointment on Napoleon's return to power.
On the second restoration of the monarchy, he obtained a post as engineer in Paris, where much of his life from that time was spent. His researches in optics, continued until his death, appear to have been begun about the year 1814, when he prepared a paper on the aberration of light, which, however, was not published. In 1818 he wrote a memoir on diffraction for which in the ensuing year he received the prize of the Acad mie des Sciences at Paris. He was in 1823 unanimously elected a member of the academy, and in 1825 he became a member of the Royal Society of London, which in 1827, at the time of his last illness, awarded him the Rumford Medal. In 1819 he was nominated a commissioner of lighthouses, for which he was the first to construct a special type of lens, now called a Fresnel lens, as substitutes for mirrors. He died of tuberculosis at Ville d'Avray, near Paris.
His labours in the cause of optical science received during his lifetime only scant public recognition, and some of his papers were not printed by the Acad mie des Sciences till many years after his decease. But, as he wrote to Young in 1824, in him "that sensibility, or that vanity, which people call love of glory" had been blunted. "All the compliments," he says, "that I have received from Arago, Laplace and Biot never gave me so much pleasure as the discovery of a theoretic truth, or the confirmation of a calculation by experiment."
Researches
His discoveries and mathematical deductions, building on experimental work by Thomas Young, extended the wave theory of light to a large class of optical phenomena.
His use of two plane mirrors of metal, forming with each other an angle of nearly 180 , allowed him to avoid the diffraction effects caused (by the apertures) in the experiment of FM Grimaldi on interference. This allowed him to conclusively account for the phenomena of interference in accordance with the wave theory.
With Fran ois Arago he studied the laws of the interference of polarized rays. He obtained circularly polarized light by means of a rhombus of glass, known as "Fresnel's rhomb", having obtuse angles of 126 and acute angles of 54 .
He is perhaps best known as the inventor of the Fresnel lens, first adopted in lighthouses while he was a French commissioner of lighthouses, and found in many applications today.
See also
Fresnel equations
Fresnel integral
Fresnel lantern
Fresnel lens
Fresnel rhomb
Fresnel zone
Fresnel zone plate
External link and reference
Fresnel, Augustin Jean
Fresnel, Augustin Jean
Fresnel, Augustin Jean
Fresnel, Augustin Jean
Fresnel, Augustin Jean
ca:Augustin Jean Fresnel
de:Augustin Jean Fresnel
fr:Augustin Fresnel
hr:Augustin Jean Fresnel
io:Augustin Fresnel
nl:Augustin Jean Fresnel
ja:
pl:Augustin Jean Fresnel
'''Abbeville''' is a city in the Picardie ''r gion'', in the north of France.
Location
Abbeville is located on the Somme River, 12 m. from its modern mouth in the English Channel, and 28 m. northwest of Amiens. In the medieval period, it was the lowest crossing point on the Somme and it was nearby that Edward III's army crossed shortly before the Battle of Cr cy in 1346.
Administration
Abbeville was the chief town of the former province of Ponthieu. Today, it is one of the three ''sous pr fectures'' of the Somme ''d partement''.
It is twinned with the town of Burgess Hill in West Sussex.
Prehistory
The name Abbeville has been adopted to name a category of early stone tools. These stone tools are also known as handaxes. Various handaxes were found near Abbeville by Jacques Boucher de Perthes during the 1830's and he was the first to desribe the stones in detail, pointing out in the first publication of its kind, that the stones were chipped deliberately by early man, so as to form a tool. These earliest stone tools found in Europe were chipped on both sides so as to form a sharp edge, are now known as Abbevillian handaxes or bifaces . The earlier form of stone tools, not found in Europe is known as Oldewan choppers . A more refined and later version of handax production was also found in the Abbeville Somme River district. The more refined handax became known as the Acheulean industry, named after Saint Acheul, today a suburb of Amiens .
History
Abbeville first appears in history during the 9th century. At that time belonging to the abbey of St Riquier, it was afterwards governed by the Counts of Ponthieu. Together with that county, it came into the possession of the Alen on and other French families, and afterwards into that of the house of Castile, from whom by marriage it fell in 1272 to King Edward I of England. French and English were its masters by turns till 1435 when, by the treaty of Arras, it was ceded to the Duke of Burgundy. In 1477 it was annexed by King Louis XI of France, and was held by two illegitimate branches of the royal family in the 16th and 17th centuries, being in 1696 reunited to the crown. In 1514, the town saw the marriage of Louis XII of France to Mary Tudor, the daughter of Henry VII of England.
Abbeville was fairly important in the 18th century, when the Van Robais Royal Manufacture (one of the first major factories in France) brought great prosperity (but some class controversy) to the town. Voltaire, among others, wrote about it. He also wrote about a major incident of intolerance in which a young impoverished lord, the Chevalier de la Barre, was executed there for impiety (supposedly because he did not salute a procession for Corpus Christi, though the story is far more complex than that and revolves around a mutilated cross.)
Historical population:
:1901: 18,519
:1906: 18,971
Sights
The city was very picturesque until the early days of World War II, when it was bombed mostly to rubble in one night by the Germans. The town overall is now mostly modern and rebuilt. Several of the town's attractions remain, including:
St. Vulfran's church, erected in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. The original design was not completed. The nave has only two bays and the choir is insignificant. The facade is a magnificent specimen of the flamboyant Gothic style, flanked by two Gothic towers.
See also
Abbevillian
Reference
''The following text, from a turn of the century encyclopedia should be updated, wikified and incorporated into the above article:''
It lies in a pleasant and fertile valley, and is built partly on an island and partly on both sides of the river, which is canalized from this point to the estuary. The streets are narrow, and the houses are mostly picturesque old structures, built of wood, with many quaint gables and dark archways. The most remarkable building is the church of St Vulfran. Abbeville has several other old churches and an Hotel de Ville, with a belfry of the 13th century. Among the numerous old houses, that known as the Maison de Francois I, which is the most remarkable, dates from the 16th century. There is a statue of Admiral Courbet (d. 1885) by Alexandre Falgui re in the chief square. The public institutions include tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a board of trade arbitrators, and a communal college. Abbeville is an important industrial centre in addition to its old established manufacture of cloth, hemp spinning, sugar making, ship building and locksmiths' work are carried on there is active commerce in grain, but the port has little trade.
Category:Archaeological sites in France
Category:Communes of Somme
cs:Abbeville
da:Abbeville
de:Abbeville
et:Abbeville
fr:Abbeville
gl:Abbeville
it:Abbeville (Francia)
nl:Abbeville
pl:Abb ville
ro:Abbeville
ru:
sv:Abbeville
The word abbot, meaning father, has been used as a Christian clerical title in various, mainly monastic, meanings.
Origins
The title had its origin in the monasteries of Syria, spread through the eastern Mediterranean, and soon became accepted generally in all languages as the designation of the head of a monastery. Originally, the word, meaning father, was applied to various priests, e.g. at the court of the Frankish monarchy the ''Abbas palatinus'' ('of the palace') and ''Abbas castrensis'' ('of the camp) were chaplains to the Merovingian Carolingian sovereign's court viz. to his army. At first it was employed as a respectful title for any monk, but it was soon restricted by canon law to certain priestly superiors. The name "abbot" came in fairly general use in western monastic orders whose members (or the 'full' level at least) are ordained priest. However, various congregations chose other titles for their superiors, e.g. among the Dominicans, Carmelites, Augustinians, etc., ''Praepositus'', ''Provost'', and ''Prior'' among the Franciscans, ''Custos,'' "guardian" and by the monks of Camaldoli, "Major."
Monastic History
An '''abbot''' (from the Hebrew ''ab,'' "a father", through the Syriac ''abba,'' Latin ''abbas'' (genitive form, ''abbatis''), Old English ''abbad,'' German ''Abt '' French ''abb '') is the head and chief governor of a community of monks, called also in the East ''hegumenos'' or ''archimandrite.'' The English version for a female monastic head is '''abbess'''.
In Egypt, the first home of monasticism, the jurisdiction of the abbot, or archimandrite, was but loosely defined. Sometimes he ruled over only one community, sometimes over several, each of which had its own abbot as well. Cassian speaks of an abbot of the Thebaid who had 500 monks under him. By the Rule of St Benedict, which, until the reform of Cluny, was the norm in the West, the abbot has jurisdiction over only one community. The rule, as was inevitable, was subject to frequent violations but it was not until the foundation of the Cluniac Order that the idea of a supreme abbot, exercising jurisdiction over all the houses of an order, was definitely recognized.
Monks, as a rule, were laymen, nor at the outset was the abbot any exception. For the reception of the sacraments, and for other religious offices, the abbot and his monks were commanded to attend the nearest church. This rule proved inconvenient when a monastery was situated in a desert or at a distance from a city, and necessity compelled the ordination of some monks. This innovation was not introduced without a struggle, ecclesiastical dignity being regarded as inconsistent with the higher spiritual life, but, before the close of the 5th century, at least in the East, abbots seem almost universally to have become deacons, if not priests. The change spread more slowly in the West, where the office of abbot was commonly filled by laymen till the end of the 7th century. The ecclesiastical leadership exercised by abbots despite their frequent lay status is proved by their attendance and votes at ecclesiastical councils. Thus at the first Council of Constantinople, AD 448, 23 archimandrites or abbots sign, with 30 bishops.
The second Council of Nicaea, AD 787, recognized the right of abbots to ordain their monks to the inferior orders below the diaconate, a power usually reserved to bishops.
Abbots were originally subject to episcopal jurisdiction, and continued generally so, in fact, in the West till the 11th century. The Code of Justinian (lib. i. tit. iii. de Ep. leg. xl.) expressly subordinates the abbot to episcopal oversight. The first case recorded of the partial exemption of an abbot from episcopal control is that of Faustus, abbot of Lerins, at the council of Arles, AD 456 but the exorbitant claims and exactions of bishops, to which this repugnance to episcopal control is to be traced, far more than to the arrogance of abbots, rendered it increasingly frequent, and, in the 6th century, the practice of exempting religious houses partly or altogether from episcopal control, and making them responsible to the pope alone, received an impulse from Pope Gregory the Great. These exceptions, introduced with a good object, had grown into a widespread evil by the 12th century, virtually creating an ''imperium in imperio,'' and depriving the bishop of all authority over the chief centres of influence in his diocese. In the 12th century the abbots of Fulda claimed precedence of the archbishop of Cologne. Abbots more and more assumed almost episcopal state, and in defiance of the prohibition of early councils and the protests of St Bernard and others, adopted the episcopal insignia of mitre, ring, gloves and sandals. It has been maintained that the right to wear mitres was sometimes granted by the popes to abbots before the 11th century, but the documents on which this claim is based are not genuine (J. Braun, ''Liturgische Gewandung'', p. 453). The first undoubted instance is the bull by which Alexander II in 1063 granted the use of the mitre to Egelsinus, abbot of the monastery of St Augustine at Canterbury. The '''mitred abbots''' in England were those of Abingdon, St Alban's, Bardney, Battle, Bury St Edmund's, St Augustine's Canterbury, Colchester, Croyland, Evesham, Glastonbury, Gloucester, St Benet's Hulme, Hyde, Malmesbury, Peterborough, Ramsey, Reading, Selby, Shrewsbury, Tavistock, Thorney, Westminster, Winchcombe, St Mary's York. Of these the precedence was originally yielded to the abbot of Glastonbury, until in AD 1154 Adrian IV (Nicholas Breakspear) granted it to the abbot of St Alban's, in which monastery he had been brought up. Next after the abbot of St Alban's ranked the abbot of Westminster. To distinguish abbots from bishops, it was ordained that their mitre should be made of less costly materials, and should not be ornamented with gold, a rule which was soon entirely disregarded, and that the crook of their pastoral staff should turn inwards instead of outwards, indicating that their jurisdiction was limited to their own house.
The adoption of certain episcopal insignia (pontificalia) by abbots was followed by an encroachment on episcopal functions, which had to be specially but ineffectually guarded against by the Lateran council, AD 1123. In the East, abbots, if in priests' orders, with the consent of the bishop, were, as we have seen, permitted by the second Nicene council, AD 787, to confer the tonsure and admit to the order of reader but gradually abbots, in the West also, advanced higher claims, until we find them in AD 1489 permitted by Innocent IV to confer both the subdiaconate and diaconate. Of course, they always and everywhere had the power of admitting their own monks and vesting them with the religious habit.
When a vacancy occurred, the bishop of the diocese chose the abbot out of the monks of the convent, but the right of election was transferred by jurisdiction to the monks themselves, reserving to the bishop the confirmation of the election and the benediction of the new abbot. In abbeys exempt from the (arch)bishop's diocesan jurisdiction, the confirmation and benediction had to be conferred by the pope in person, the house being taxed with the expenses of the new abbot's journey to Rome. It was necessary that an abbot should be at least 25 years of age, of legitimate birth, a monk of the house, unless it furnished no suitable candidate, when a liberty was allowed of electing from another convent, well instructed himself, and able to instruct others, one also who had learned how to command by having practised obedience. In some exceptional cases an abbot was allowed to name his own successor. Cassian speaks of an abbot in Egypt doing this and in later times we have another example in the case of St Bruno. Popes and sovereigns gradually encroached on the rights of the monks, until in Italy the pope had usurped the nomination of all abbots, and the king in France, with the exception of Cluny, Premontre and other houses, chiefs of their order. The election was for life, unless the abbot was canonically deprived by the chiefs of his order, or when he was directly subject to them, by the pope or the bishop.
The ceremony of the formal admission of a Benedictine abbot in medieval times is thus prescribed by the consuetudinary of Abingdon. The newly elected abbot was to put off his shoes at the door of the church, and proceed barefoot to meet the members of the house advancing in a procession. After proceeding up the nave, he was to kneel and pray at the topmost step of the entrance of the choir, into which he was to be introduced by the bishop or his commissary, and placed in his stall. The monks, then kneeling, gave him the kiss of peace on the hand, and rising, on the mouth, the abbot holding his staff of office. He then put on his shoes in the vestry, and a chapter was held, and the bishop or his delegate preached a suitable sermon.
The power of the abbot was paternal but absolute, limited, however, by the canon law. One of the main goals of monasticism was the purgation of self and selfishness, and obedience was seen as a path to that perfection. It was sacred duty to execute the abbot's orders, and even to act without his orders was sometimes considered a transgression. Examples among the Egyptian monks of this submission to the commands of the superiors, exalted into a virtue by those who regarded the entire crushing of the individual will as a goal, are detailed by Cassian and others, e.g. a monk watering a dry stick, day after day, for months, or endeavouring to remove a huge rock immensely exceeding his powers.
General Information
Before the late modern era, the abbot was treated with the utmost reverence by the brethren of his house. When he appeared either in church or chapter all present rose and bowed. His letters were received kneeling, as were those of the pope and the king. No monk might sit in his presence, or leave it without his permission, reflecting the hierarchical etiquette of families and society. The highest place was assigned to him, both in church and at table. In the East he was commanded to eat with the other monks. In the West the Rule of St Benedict appointed him a separate table, at which he might entertain guests and strangers. This permission opening the door to luxurious living, the council of Aachen, AD 817, decreed that the abbot should dine in the refectory, and be content with the ordinary fare of the monks, unless he had to entertain a guest. These ordinances proved, however, generally ineffectual to secure strictness of diet, and contemporaneous literature abounds with satirical remarks and complaints concerning the inordinate extravagance of the tables of the abbots. When the abbot condescended to dine in the refectory, his chaplains waited upon him with the dishes, a servant, if necessary, assisting them. When abbots dined in their own private hall, the Rule of St Benedict charged them to invite their monks to their table, provided there was room, on which occasions the guests were to abstain from quarrels, slanderous talk and idle gossiping.
The ordinary attire of the abbot was according to rule to be the same as that of the monks. But by the 10th century the rule was commonly set aside, and we find frequent complaints of abbots dressing in silk, and adopting sumptuous attire. They sometimes even laid aside the monastic habit altogether, and assumed a secular dress. With the increase of wealth and power, abbots had lost much of their special religious character, and become great lords, chiefly distinguished from lay lords by celibacy. Thus we hear of abbots going out to hunt, with their men carrying bows and arrows keeping horses, dogs and huntsmen and special mention is made of an abbot of Leicester, c. 1360, who was the most skilled of all the nobility in hare hunting. In magnificence of equipage and retinue the abbots vied with the first nobles of the realm. They rode on mules with gilded bridles, rich saddles and housings, carrying hawks on their wrist, followed by an immense train of attendants. The bells of the churches were rung as they passed. They associated on equal terms with laymen of the highest distinction, and shared all their pleasures and pursuits. This rank and power was, however, often used most beneficially. For instance, we read of Whiting, the last abbot of Glastonbury, judicially murdered by Henry VIII, that his house was a kind of well ordered court, where as many as 300 sons of noblemen and gentlemen, who had been sent to him for virtuous education, had been brought up, besides others of a lesser rank, whom he fitted for the universities. His table, attendance and officers were an honour to the nation. He would entertain as many as 500 persons of rank at one time, besides relieving the poor of the vicinity twice a week. He had his country houses and fisheries, and when he travelled to attend parliament his retinue amounted to upwards of 100 persons. The abbots of Cluny and Vend me were, by virtue of their office, cardinals of the Roman church.
In process of time the title abbot was extended to clerics who had no connection with the monastic system, as to the principal of a body of parochial clergy and
under the Carolingians to the chief chaplain of the king, ''Abbas Curiae,'' or military chaplain of the emperor, ''Abbas Castrensis.'' It even came to be adopted by purely secular officials. Thus the chief magistrate of the republic at Genoa was called ''Abbas Populi''.
Lay abbots (M. Lat. ''defensores'', ''abbacomites'', ''abbates laici'', ''abbates milites'', ''abbates saeculares'' or ''irreligiosi'', ''abbatiarii'', or sometimes simply ''abbates'') were the outcome of the growth of the feudal system from the 8th century onwards. The practice of commendation, by which to meet a contemporary emergency the revenues of the community were handed over to a lay lord, in return for his protection,
early suggested to the emperors and kings the expedient of rewarding their warriors with rich abbeys held ''in commendam.''
During the Carolingian epoch the custom grew up of granting these as regular heritable fiefs or benefices, and by the 10th century, before the great Cluniac reform, the system was firmly established. Even the abbey of St Denis was held in commendam by Hugh Capet. The example of the kings was followed by the feudal nobles, sometimes by making a temporary concession permanent, sometimes without any form of commendation whatever. In England the abuse was rife in the 8th century, as may be gathered from the acts of the council of Cloveshoe. These lay abbacies were not merely a question of
overlordship, but implied the concentration in lay hands of all the rights, immunities and jurisdiction of the foundations, i.e. the more or less complete secularization of spiritual institutions. The lay abbot took his recognized rank in the feudal hierarchy, and was free to dispose of his fief as in the case of any other. The enfeoffment of abbeys differed in form and degree. Sometimes the monks were directly subject to the lay abbot sometimes he appointed a
substitute to perform the spiritual functions, known usually as dean (decanus), but also as abbot (''abbas legitimas'', ''monasticus'', ''regularis''). When the great reform of the 11th century had put an end to the direct jurisdiction of the lay abbots, the honorary title of abbot continued to be held by certain of the great feudal famines, as late as the 13th century and later, the actual head of the community retaining that of dean. The connection of the lesser lay abbots with the abbeys, especially in the south of France, lasted longer and certain feudal families retained the title of abbes chevaliers (abbates milltes) for centuries, together with certain rights over the abbey lands or revenues. The abuse was not confined to the West. John, patriarch of Antioch, at the beginning of the 12th Century, informs us that in his time most monasteries had been handed over to laymen, ''bencficiarii,'' for life, or for part of their lives, by the emperors.
Giraldus Cambrensis reported (''Itinerary'', ii.iv) the common customs of lay abbots in the late 12th century Church of Wales:
:"for a bad custom has prevailed amongst the clergy, of appointing the most powerful people of a parish stewards, or, rather, patrons, of their churches who, in process of time, from a desire of gain, have usurped the whole right, appropriating to their own use the possession of all the lands, leaving only to the clergy the altars, with their tenths and oblations, and assigning even these to their sons and relations in the church. Such defenders, or rather destroyers, of the church, have caused themselves to be called abbots, and presumed to attribute to themselves a title, as well as estates, to which they have no just claim."
In conventual cathedrals, where the bishop occupied the place of the abbot, the functions usually devolving on the superior of the monastery were performed by a prior.
Abbatial hierarchy
In several orders, there exists a pyramidal relationship between a major abbey (often the old mother of several others, especially if it was the place from where a monastic reform was launched, which in other cases even lead to breaking away as a new order of congregation) and other ones (often younger daughters), even when these are not (or no longer) priories but have their own abbot.
As a daughter could often become a mother in a next phase, the 'family tree' can become very complex, but often the grandmother remains the only one with acknowledged seniority.(because she is old ...)
Sometimes a very real hold was maintained, so the Abbot of Cluny had such vast income from the network of filial monasteries that he was one of the most powerful men in the church, and a real papabile. In other cases the precedence is little more than a honorary status.
In several cases, the senior abbot is entitled to '''a specific style''', such as Abbot general, abbot president, abbot primate and archabbot.
Such titles may also apply to the presidents of federation of monasteries, not necessarily reserved for one abbey.
Modern Abbots not as Superior
The title abb (French Ital. ''abbate''), as commonly used in the Catholic church on the European continent, is the equivalent of the English "Father" (parallel etymology), being loosely applied to all who have received the tonsure. This use of the title is said to have originated in the right conceded to the king of France, by the concordat between Pope Leo X and Francis I (1516), to appoint ''abbes commendataires'' to most of the abbeys in France. The expectation of obtaining these sinecures drew young men towards the church in considerable numbers, and the class of abb s so formed ''abbes de cour'' they were sometimes called, and sometimes (ironically) ''abbes de sainte esperance'', abb s of St Hope came to hold a recognized position. The connection many of them had with the church was of the slenderest kind, consisting mainly in adopting the name of abbe, after a remarkably moderate course of theological study, practising celibacy and wearing a distinctive dress a short dark violet coat with narrow collar. Being men of presumed learning and undoubted leisure, many of the class found admission to the houses of the French nobility as tutors or advisers. Nearly every great family had its abb . The class did not survive the Revolution but the courtesy title of abb , having long lost all connection in people's minds with any special ecclesiastical function, remained as a convenient general term applicable to any clergyman.
Protestant abbots
In the German Evangelical Church the German title of ''Abt'' (abbot) is sometimes bestowed, like the French ''abb '', as an honorary distinction, and survives to designate the heads of some monasteries converted at the Reformation into collegiate foundations.
Of these the most noteworthy is the abbey of Lokkum in Hanover, founded as a Cistercian house in 1163 by Count Wilbrand of Hallermund, and reformed in 1593. The abbot of Lokkum, who still carries a pastoral staff, takes precedence of all the clergy of Hanover, and was ''ex officio'' a member of the consistory of the kingdom. The governing body of the abbey consists of the abbot, prior and the "convent" of ''Stiftsherren'' (canons).
In the Church of England, the Bishop of Norwich, by royal decree given by Henry VIII, also holds the honorary title of "Abbot of St. Ben t." This title hails back to England's separation from Rome, when King Henry, as supreme head of the newly independent church, took over all of the monastaries, mainly for their possessions, except for St. Ben t, which he spared because the abbot and his monks possesed no wealth, and lived like simple beggers, disposing the incumbent Bishop of Norwich and seating the abbot in his place, thus the dual title still held to this day.
See also
List of historical abbots
Hegumen
Archimandrite
Sources and References
Category:Abbots
category: Ecclesiastical titles
Category:Organisation of Catholic religious orders
Category:Christian leaders
Category:Religious work
Category:Religious executives
ang:Abbod
ca:Abat
cs:Opat
da:Abbed
de:Abt
es:Abad
eo:Abato
fr:Abb
gl:Abade
ia:Abba
it:Abate
li:Abdis
hu:Ap t
nl:Abt (abdij)
nds:Abt
no:Abbed
pl:Opat
pt:Abade
ru:
fi:Apotti
sv:Abbot
Taxobox color pink
name Ardipithecus
fossil range Pliocene
image Ardipithecus ramidus tooth.jpg
image width 200px
image caption ''Ardipithecus ramidus'' teeth
regnum Animalia
phylum Chordata
classis Mammalia
ordo Primates
familia Hominidae
subfamilia Homininae
tribus Hominini
genus '''''Ardipithecus'''''
genus authority White, 1994
subdivision ranks Species
subdivision ''Ardipithecus kadabba''br ''Ardipithecus ramidus''
'''''Ardipithecus''''' is a very early hominin genus (subfamily Homininae). Because it shares several traits with the African great apes (genus ''Pan'' and genus ''Gorilla''), it is considered by some to be on the chimpanzee rather than human branch, but most consider it a proto human because of a likeness in teeth with ''Australopithecus''. ''A. ramidus'' lived about 5.4 and 4.2 million years ago during the early Pliocene.
Two species have been described, ''Ardipithecus ramidus'' and ''Ardipithecus kadabba''. The latter was initially described as a subspecies of ''A. ramidus'', but on the basis of teeth recently discovered in Ethiopia has been raised to species rank. ''A. kadabba'' is dated to have lived between 5.8 million to 5.2 million years ago. The canine teeth show primitive features that distinguish them from those of more recent hominines. ''A. kadabba'' is believed to be the earliest organism yet identified that lies in the human line following its split from the lineage that gave rise to the two modern chimpanzee species.
On the basis of bone sizes, ''Ardipithecus'' species are believed to have been about the size of a modern chimpanzee. The toe structure of ''A. ramidus'' suggests that the creature walked upright, and this poses problems for current theories of the origins of hominid bipedalism: ''Ardipithecus'' is believed to have lived in shady forests rather than on the savannah, where the faster running permitted by bipedalism would have been an advantage.
The forest lifestyle poses problems for the current theories regarding the development of bipedalism, most of which focus on the savanna. New thought will be necessary in order to reconcile these savanna theories with the current knowledge of early forest dwelling hominids.
External links
Category:early hominids
Category:Pliocene
de:Ardipithecus ramidus
eu:Ardipithecus
es:Ardipithecus ramidus
fr:Ardipithecus ramidus
it:Ardipithecus kadabba
lb:Ardipithecus
nl:Ardipithecus
pl:Ardipithecus ramidus
An '''assembly line''' is a manufacturing process in which interchangeable parts are added to a product in a sequential manner to create an end product.
History of the assembly line
Until the 19th century, a single craftsman or team of craftsmen would create each part of a product individually, and assemble them together into a single item, making changes in the parts so that they would fit together the so called English System of manufacture.
Eli Whitney developed the American System of manufacturing in 1799, using the ideas of ''division of labor'' and of ''engineering tolerance'', to create assemblies from parts in a repeatable manner.
Ransom Eli Olds patented the first assembly line concept which he put to work in his Olds Motor Vehicle Company factory in 1901, becoming the first company in America to mass produce automobiles.
By contrast, Henry Ford is often credited with the invention of the assembly line but in actuality only applied the idea of using the conveyer belt to Olds' idea of the assembly line.
Sociological problems with the assembly line
In early industrial times, the assembly line ran smoothly, but as competition increased, the workers had to work faster and longer hours, therefore increasing the rate at which workplace injuries occurred.
Many workers were unhappy with the assembly line, because most never had the satisfaction of seeing the finished product (in sociological terms, they felt alienated from the product of their work), and they were also frustrated with the unsafe, exhausting working conditions. Because workers had to stand in the same place for hours and repeat the same motion hundreds of times per day, they often suffered from what are now called repetitive stress injuries.
See also
Henry Ford
Ransom Eli Olds
Manufacturing
Category:Manufacturingcategory:Production and manufacturing
de:Flie bandfertigung
he:
Infobox TV channel
name ARY Digital
launch December 2000
owner ARY Group
former names The Pakistani Channel
web
terr avail Not Available
sat serv 1 Sky Digital
sat chan 1 Channel 812
sat serv 2 Astra
sat chan 2 11.9973 GHz
sat serv 3 Hotbird
sat chan 3 12.476 GHz
sat serv 4 PAS 10
sat chan 4 3864 MHz
cable serv 1 Telewest
cable chan 1 Channel 818
cable serv 2 NTL
cable chan 2 Channel 847
dummy parameter
'''ARY Digital''' is a popular South Asian television network based in Dubai, UAE. It also has studios in London and Pakistan. Most programmes cater to the needs of South Asians, especially the Pakistani community. The channel also brings Urdu programmes and Urdu songs by Pakistani singers who rock the South Asian subcontinent.
History
The network was formerly known as '''The Pakistani Channel''', which was owned by a charismatic business man, who started it as a medium of social responsibility while bridging the gap between Asians abroad and in Pakistan. Its name was changed when it was purchased by the ARY Group. ARY Digital specialises in popular live English and Urdu programming, such as VIDEO MIX shown on Sundays and presented by Yassir and Zaina.
External links
Category:ARY Digital
Category:Television stations in Pakistan
! BEGIN INFOBOX
Infobox Australian City
name Adelaide
image map Adelaide locator MJC.png
name Adelaide
latd 34 latm 55 latNS S longd 138 longm 36 longEW E
jurisdiction South Australia
area 1,826.9
time zone ACST
utc offset 9:30
time zone DST ACDT
utc offset DST 10:30
population estimate year 2004
population estimate 1,124,315
population estimate rank 5th
population density 615
! END INFOBOX
'''Adelaide''' is the capital and most populous city of the Australian state of South Australia, and is the fifth largest city in Australia with a population of over 1.1 million. Adelaide is a coastal city beside the Southern Ocean and is situated on the Adelaide Plains, north of the Fleurieu Peninsula, between the Gulf St. Vincent and the low lying Mount Lofty Ranges. It is a roughly linear city 20 km from the coast to the foothills, but stretches 90 km from Gawler at its northern extent to Aldinga in the south.
Named in honour of Queen Adelaide, the consort of King William IV, the city was founded in 1836 as the planned capital for the only freely settled British province established in Australia. Colonel William Light, one of Adelaide's founding fathers, designed the city and chose its location close to the River Torrens. Inspired by William Penn and the garden city movement, Light's design set Adelaide out in a grid layout, interspaced by wide boulevards and large public squares, and entirely surrounded by parkland. Early Adelaide was shaped by religious freedom and a commitment to political progressivism and civil liberties which led to world first reforms. Adelaidean society remained largely puritan up until the 1970s, when a set of social reforms under the premiership of Don Dunstan resulted in a cultural revival. Today Adelaide is known for its many festivals as well as for its wine, arts and sports.
As South Australia's seat of government and commercial centre, Adelaide is the site of many governmental and financial institutions. Most of these are concentrated in the city centre along the cultural boulevard of North Terrace and in various districts of the metropolitan area.
History
Prior to European settlement, the Adelaide area was inhabited by the Kaurna Aboriginal tribe. Acknowledged Kaurna country comprised the Adelaide Plains and surrounding regions from Cape Jervis in the south, and to Port Wakefield in the north. Among their unique customs were burn offs (controlled bushfires) in the Adelaide Hills which the early Europeans spotted before the Kaurna people were pushed out by settlement. By 1852, the total population (by census count) of the Kaurna was 650 in the Adelaide region and steadily decreasing. During the winter months, they moved into the Adelaide hills for better shelter and firewood.
, looking south east from North Terrace
South Australia was officially settled as a new British province on December 28, 1836. This day is now commemorated as a public holiday, Proclamation Day in South Australia. The site of the colonies capital city was surveyed and laid out by Colonel William Light, the first Surveyor General of South Australia. Light chose, not without opposition, a site on rising ground close to the River Torrens, which became the chief early water supply for the fledgling colony. "Light's Vision", as it has been termed, has meant that the initial design of Adelaide required little modification as the city grew and prospered. Usually in an older city, it would be necessary to accommodate larger roads and add parks, whereas Adelaide had them from the start. Adelaide was established as the centre of a planned colony of free immigrants, promising civil liberties and freedom from religious persecution and as such does not share the convict settlement history of other Australian cities, like Sydney and Hobart.
Adelaide's early history was wrought by economic uncertainty and incompetent leadership. The first governor of South Australia, Hindmarsh, clashed frequently with Col Light. The rural area surrounding Adelaide city was surveyed by Light in preparation to sell, a total of over 405 km of land. Adelaide's early economy started to get on its feet in 1838 with the arrival of livestock from New South Wales and Tasmania. The wool industry served as a early basis for the South Australian economy. Light's survey was completed in this period, and land was promptly offered to sale to early colonists. Wheat farms ranged from Encounter Bay in the south to Clare in the north by 1860. Governor Gawler took over from Hindmarsh in late 1838 and promptly oversaw construction of a governor's house, gaol, police barracks, hospital, and customs house and a wharf at Port Adelaide. In addition houses for public officials and missionaries, and outstations for police and surveyors were also constructed during Gawler's governorship. Adelaide had also become economically self sufficent during this period but at heavy cost: the colony was heavily in debt and relied on bail outs from London to stay afloat. Gawler was recalled and replaced by Governor Grey in 1841. Grey slashed public expenditure against heavy opposition, yet its impact was negligible at this point: Silver was discovered in Glen Osmond that year, agricultural industries were well underway and other mines sprung up all over the state, aiding Adelaide's commercial development. The city exported meat, wool, wine, fruit and wheat by the time Grey left in 1845, contrasting with a low point in 1842 when one third of Adelaide houses were abandoned.
Trade links with the rest of the Australian states were established with the navigation of the Murray River being successfully navigated in 1853 by Francis Cadell, an Adelaide resident. Adelaide saw South Australia become a Self governing colony in 1856 with the ratification of a new constitution by the British parliament. Secret ballots were introduced, and a bicameral parliament was elected on 9 March 1857, by which time 109 917 people lived in the province. In 1860 the Thorndon Park reservoir was opened, finally providing an alternative water source to the turbid River Torrens. In 1867 gas street lighting was implemented, the University of Adelaide was founded in 1874, the South Australian Art Gallery opened in 1881 and the Happy Valley Reservoir opened in 1896. In the 1890s Australia was affected by a severe economic depression, ending a hectic era of land booms and tumultuous expansionism. Financial institutions in Melbourne and banks in Sydney closed. The national fertility rate fell and immigration was reduced to a trickle. The value of South Australia's exports nearly halved. Drought and poor harvests from 1884 compounded the problems with some families leaving for Western Australia. Adelaide was not as badly hit as the larger gold rush cities of Sydney and Melbourne, and silver and lead discoveries at Broken Hill provided some relief.
Only one year of deficit was recorded but the price paid was retrenchments and lean public spending. Wine and copper were the only industries not to suffer a downturn.
Electric street lighting was introduced in 1900 and electric trams were transporting passengers in 1909. 28 000 men were sent to fight in World War I. Adelaide enjoyed a post war boom but with the return of droughts, entered the depression of the 1930s, later returning to prosperity with strong government leadership. Secondary industries helped reduce the state's dependence on primary industries. The 1933 census recorded the state population at 580 949 which was less of an increase than other states due to the state's economic limitations. World War II brought industrial stimulus and diversification to Adelaide under the Playford Government, which advocated Adelaide as a safe place for manufacturing due to its less vulrenable location. 70 000 men and women enlisted and shipbuilding was expanded at the nearby port of Whyalla.
The South Australian Government in this period built on former wartime manufacturing industries. International manufacturers like General Motors Holden and Chrysler make use of these factories around Adelaide completing its transformation from an agricultural service centre to a twentieth century city. A pipeline from Mannum brought River Murray water to Adelaide in 1954 and an airport opened at West Beach in 1955. An assisted migration scheme brought 215,000 immigrants of all nationalities to South Australia between 1947 and 1973. The Dunstan Government in the 1970s saw something of an Adelaide 'cultural revival' establishing a wide array of social reforms and overseeing the city becoming a centre of the arts. Adelaide hosted the Australian Grand Prix between 1985 and 1996 on a street circuit in the city's east parklands, before losing it in a controversial move to Melbourne. The 1992 State Bank collapse plunged both Adelaide and South Australia into economic recession, and its effects can still be felt today. Recent years have seen the Clipsal 500 V8 Supercar race make use of the former Formula One circuit and renewed economic confidence under the Rann Government.
Geography
Adelaide is located north of the Fleurieu Peninsula, on the Adelaide plains between the Gulf St Vincent and the low lying Mount Lofty Ranges. The city stretches from the town of Gawler at its most northern, to Aldinga in the south. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Adelaide Metropolitan Region has a total land area of 870 km , which is at an average elevation of 50 metres above sea level. Mount Lofty is located east of the Adelaide metropolitan region in the Adelaide Hills at an elevation of 727 metres. It is the tallest point in its namesake range.
Much of Adelaide was originally bushland before European settlement, with some variation swamps and marshlands were prevalent around the coast. However, much of the original vegetation has been cleared with the remainder remaining in reserves such as the Adelaide Parklands, Cleland Conservation Park and Belair National Park. A number of creeks and rivers flow through the Adelaide region. The largest are the Torrens and Onkaparinga catchments. Adelaide relies on its many reservoirs for water supply, with Mount Bold Reservoir and Happy Valley Reservoir together supplying around 50 of Adelaide's requirements.
Climate
Adelaide has a Mediterranean climate, where most of the rain falls in the winter months. Of the Australian capital cities, Adelaide is the driest. Rainfall is unreliable, light and infrequent throughout summer. In contrast, the winter has fairly reliable rainfall with June being the wettest month of the year, averaging around 80 mm. Frosts are rare, with the most notable occurrences having occurred in July 1908 and July 1982. There is usually no appreciable snowfall, except at Mount Lofty and some places in the Adelaide Hills.
class "wikitable" style "width: 75 margin: 0 auto 0 auto "
'''Climate Table'''
!
! Jan
! Feb
! Mar
! Apr
! May
! Jun
! Jul
! Aug
! Sep
! Oct
! Nov
! Dec
!Year
! Mean daily maximum temperature ( C)
28.8
29.4
26.1
22.4
18.9
16.1
15.3
16.5
18.8
21.5
24.8
26.8
22.1
! Mean daily minimum temperature ( C)
16.8
17.2
15.0
12.2
10.1
8.2
7.4
8.2
9.6
11.3
13.8
15.5
12.1
! Mean total rainfall (mm)
19.2
13.7
26.2
38.7
62.6
83.1
77.8
68.1
63.6
48.5
29.6
26.8
558.1
! Mean number of rain days
4.3
3.4
5.7
7.9
12.3
15.4
16.2
16.4
13.2
10.8
8.1
6.7
120.5
colspan "15" style "text align: center " small'''Source:''' small
Urban Layout
Adelaide is a planned city, designed by the first surveyor general of South Australia, Colonel William Light. His plan, now known as '''Light's Vision''', arranged Adelaide in a grid, with five squares in the inner City of Adelaide and a ring of parks known as the Adelaide Parklands surrounding it. Light's design was initially unpopular with the early settlers, as well as South Australia's first Governor, John Hindmarsh. Light persisted with his design against this initial opposition. The benefits of Light's design are numerous Adelaide has had wide multi lane roads from its beginning, an easily navigable grid layout and a beautiful green ring around the city center. There are two sets of 'ring roads' in Adelaide that have resulted from the original design. The inner ring route borders the parklands and the outer route completely bypasses the inner city through (in clockwise order) Grand Junction Road, Hampstead Road, Ascot Avenue, Portrush Road, Cross Road and South Road.
The inevitable urban expansion has to some extent outgrown Light's original plan. Numerous satellite cities were built in the latter half of the 20th century notably Salisbury and Elizabeth on the city's northern fringes, which have now been enveloped by its urban sprawl. New developments in the Adelaide Hills region facilitated the construction of the South Eastern Freeway to cope with growth. Similarly, the booming development in Adelaide's South made the construction of the Southern Expressway a necessity. New roads have not only been used to cope with the urban growth, however the Adelaide O Bahn is an example of a unique solution to Tea Tree Gully's transport woes in the 1980's. The development of the nearby suburb of Golden Grove in the late 1980s is possibly an example of well though out urban planning. The newer urban areas as a whole, however, are not as integrated into the urban layout as much as older areas, and therefore place more stress on Adelaide's transportation system although not on a level comparable with Melbourne or Sydney.
of the ''Square Mile'' (central business district) from Montefiore Hill in North Adelaide. The historic Adelaide Oval is visible in the centre foreground. div
Governance
on North Terrace houses the Parliament of South Australia.
The City of Adelaide is responsible only for the "Square Mile", which is the central business district (CBD), North Adelaide and the surrounding Adelaide Parklands. It is the oldest municipal authority in Australia and was established in 1840, when Adelaide and Australia's first mayor, James Hurtle Fisher, was elected. From 1919 onwards, the City has had a Lord Mayor, the current being Lord Mayor Michael Harbison. The City of Adelaide has a population of approximately 18,000 people in an area of 15.57 km . The population of the inner city has dwindled from its peak of about 250,000 as the metropolitan area has expanded. The entire metropolitan region, including the city proper, has a population of 1,080,990 people (2001 census) in an area of 870km , and is divided into 18 autonomous local government areas. However, as South Australia's capital and most populous city, the State Government co operates extensively with the City of Adelaide a relationship manifest in the Capital City Committee , which is primarily concerned with the planning of Adelaide's urban development and growth.
Demographics
As of June 2004, Adelaide had a metropolitan population of more than 1,124,315, making it Australia's fifth largest city. In the 2002 2003 period the population grew by 0.6 , while the national average was 1.2 . Some 70.3 of the population of South Australia is resident within the metropolitan area, making South Australia one of the most centralised states. Major areas of population growth in recent years were in outer suburbs such as Mawson Lakes and Golden Grove. Adelaide's inhabitants occupy 325,000 houses, 57,000 detached, row terrace or town houses and 49,000 flats, apartments and caravans.
Major areas of population growth in recent years were in outer suburbs such as Mawson Lakes and Golden Grove. Overseas born Adelaideans composed 24.6 (242, 092) of the total population. The North Eastern Suburbs (such as Golden Grove and Salisbury) and suburbs close to the CBD had a higher ratio of overseas born residents. Wealthier and more well educated Adelaideans are concentrated on the coastal suburbs (such as Brighton and Hallett Cove) and South Eastern suburbs (such as Burnside and Waterfall Gully). Almost a fifth (17.9 ) of the population had university qualifications. The number of Adelaideans with vocational qualifications (such as tradespersons) fell from 62.1 of the labour force in the 1991 census to 52.4 in the 2001 census.
Overall, Adelaide is ageing much more rapidly than other Australian capital cities. Just under a quarter (24.1 ) of Adelaide's population is aged 55 years or older, in comparison to the national average of 19.9 . To further compound the situation, Adelaide has the lowest number of children (under 15 year olds), which composed 18.7 of the population, compared to the national average of 20.4 . In regards to three highest ancestries, 38 of the population identified themselves as English, 34 as Australian (which is most likely primarily of Anglo Celtic background) and 8.4 as Irish. The three most spoken languages other than English were: 3.5 for Italian, 2.3 for Greek and 1.2 for Vietnamese.
Economy
Adelaide's economy is primarily based around manufacturing, defence technology and research, commodity export and corresponding service industries. It has large manufacturing, defence and research zones. They contain car manufacturing plants for General Motors Holden and Mitsubishi, and plants for medical equipment and electronic component production. Almost half of all cars produced in Australia are made in Adelaide. The global media conglomerate News Corporation was founded in and until 2004 incorporated in Adelaide and is still considered its 'spiritual' home by Rupert Murdoch. Australia's largest oil company, Santos (South Australia Northern Territory Oil Search) and the prominent South Australian brewery, Coopers calls Adelaide their home. The collapse of the State Bank in 1992 resulted in large levels of state debt (as much as A 4 billion). The collapse had meant that successive governments had enacted lean budgets, cutting spending, which had been a setback to the further development of the city and state. The debt has recently been reduced with the State Government once again receiving a AAA Credit Rating. The South Australian economy (very closely tied to Adelaide's) still enjoys a trade surplus and has higher per capita growth than Australia as a whole.
submarine HMAS Rankin
Adelaide is home to a large proportion of Australia's defence industries which contribute over AUD 1 billion to South Australia's Gross State Product. 70 of Australian defence companies are located in Adelaide. The principal government military research institution, the Defence Science and Technology Organisation, and other defence technology organisations such as Tenix are located in Salisbury near RAAF Base Edinburgh and others near Technology Park. The Australian Submarine Corporation, based in the industrial suburb of Osborne was charged with constructing Australia's Collins Class Submarines and recently won a AUD 6 billion contract to construct the Royal Australian Navy's new air warfare destroyers.
There are 466 829 employed people in Adelaide, with 62.3 employed full time and 35.1 employed part time. In recent years there has been a growing trend towards part time (which includes casual) employment, increasing from only 11.6 of the workplace in 1991, to over a third today. 15 of workers are employed in manufacturing, 5 in construction, 15 in retail trade, 11 in business services, 7 in education and 12 in health and community services. The median weekly individual income for people aged 15 years and over is 300 399 per week. The median family income is 800 999 per week. Adelaide's housing and living costs are substantially lower than that of other Australian cities, with housing being notably cheaper. The median Adelaide house price is half that of Sydney and two thirds that of Melbourne. The unemployment rate (as of October 2005) was 4.8 .
Education
:''Main article: Education in South Australia''
Adelaide is home to campuses of all three of South Australia's universities. The University of Adelaide is a member of the Group of Eight and was founded in 1874, making it the third oldest university in Australia. It has five campuses in the Adelaide area one being its primary campus on North Terrace and another being the National Wine Centre. The University of South Australia was formed in 1991 from a merger between the South Australian Institute of Technology and the South Australian Colleges of Advanced Education. Four of its six campuses are located in Adelaide, with two in the CBD itself. Flinders University, located in Bedford Park is named after British navigator and explorer Matthew Flinders and was founded in 1966. It is a mid sized institution with a medical school at the adjacent Flinders Medical Centre. Leading US private university, Carnegie Mellon, is to establish two Adelaide campuses offering both Australian and US degrees in 2006. The Heinz School will specialise in IT and government management and be based in Victoria Square, while another campus at Light Square will specialise in new media and entertainment . These institutions attract students from across Australia and around the world, earning Adelaide s international recognition as a .
School education in Adelaide is provided by a variety of public and private schools, which are the responsibility of the State Government. These schools operate under the South Australian Certificate of Education (SACE), with International Baccalaureates (IB) offered at many as well. The Tertiary Education system in Adelaide is extensive, with five out of eight centres of TAFE South Australia in the city itself, including the Douglas Mawson institute of Technology. They specialise in non university higher education offering a viable alternative.
Culture
.
Adelaide is sometimes referred to as the 'City of Churches', although this is a reflection more on Adelaide's past than its present. Rumour has it that for every church that was built in Adelaide, a pub was also built to serve the less pious. From its earliest, Adelaide attracted immigrants from many countries, particularly German migrants escaping religious persecution. They brought with them the vine cuttings that founded the acclaimed wineries of the Barossa Valley. After the Second World War Italians, Greeks, Dutch, Polish, and possibly every other European nationality came to make a new start. An influx of Asian immigrants following the Vietnam War added to the mix. These new arrivals have blended to form a rich and diverse cuisine and vibrant restaurant culture.
Adelaide's arts scene flourished in the 1970's under the leadership of premier Don Dunstan, removing some of the more puritanical restrictions on cultural activities then prevalent around Australia. Now the city is home to events such as the Barossa Music Festival, the Adelaide Festival of Arts, Adelaide Film Festival, Adelaide Festival of Ideas, Come Out youth arts festival, the Fringe Festival, among others. WOMADelaide, Australia's premier world music event, is now annually held in the scenic surrounds of Botanic Park, emphasising Adelaide's dedication to the arts which has prevailed since the days of Don Dunstan.
The annual Royal Adelaide Show, first held in 1840, began as a simple event for the state's farmers to show off their produce. Over time, it grew into a more general commercial fair held in early September in the inner suburb of Wayville, with carnival rides, food and entertainment surrounding the more traditional agricultural exhibitions and competitions.
The music of Adelaide has produced various musicians who have achieved both national and worldwide fame. Notably the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra, the Adelaide Youth Orchestra, The Mark of Cain, The Superjesus, Testeagles, Cold Chisel and Eric Bogle. American artist Ben Folds considers Adelaide his second home, epitomised in his song "Adelaide" and resides here with his Adelaide born wife for a number of months each year. The first Australian Idol winner, Guy Sebastian hails from the Adelaide suburb of Golden Grove and the popular Australian hip hop outfit Hilltop Hoods reside in O'Halloran Hill.
Media
Newspapers in Adelaide are dominated by News Corp tabloid publications. The only South Australian daily newspaper is ''The Advertiser'', published by News six days per week, while the Sunday paper is the ''Sunday Mail''. There are eleven suburban community newspapers published weekly, known collectively as the ''Messenger Newspapers'', also published by a subsidiary of News Corp. A recent addition to the print medium in the city is "The Independent Weekly", providing one alternative view. Two national daily newspapers are circulated in the city ''The Australian'' (MondayFriday) and its weekend publication, ''The Weekend Australian'' (Saturday), also published by News Corp., and ''The Australian Financial Review'' published by Fairfax. ''The Adelaide Review'' is a free paper published fortnightly and other independent magazine style papers are published, but are not as widely available.
All of the five Australian national networks broadcast both analogue PAL and widescreen digital services in Adelaide. They share three transmission towers on the ridge near the summit of Mount Lofty. The two government funded stations are ''ABC'' and ''SBS''. The ''Seven Network'' and ''Network Ten'' both own their Adelaide stations (SAS 7 and ADS 10 respectively). Adelaide's NWS 9 is affiliated with the ''Nine Network'' but is actually owned by Southern Cross Broadcasting. Adelaide also has a community television station, Channel 31. The Foxtel pay TV service is available as cable television in a few areas, as is satellite television to the entire metropolitan area. It is resold by a number of other brands, mostly telephone companies.
Sport
race.
Adelaide hosted the Formula 1 Australian Grand Prix from 1985 to 1995 on a street circuit in the city's eastern parklands. The Grand Prix became a source of pride and losing the Grand Prix to Melbourne in a surprise announcement left a void that has since been filled with the highly successful Clipsal 500 V8 Supercar race event, held on a modified version of the same street circuit.
Adelaide is the home of two Australian Football League teams: the Adelaide Crows and the Port Adelaide Football Club. A local Australian Rules Football league, the SANFL, is made up of nine teams from around Adelaide. Adelaide's professional soccer team Adelaide United play in the A League, at Hindmarsh Stadium, one of the few purpose built football stadiums in Australia. The Adelaide 36ers and the Adelaide Fellas play in national basketball competitions, with home games at the Distinctive Homes Dome and the Adelaide Thunderbirds play in the national netball competition, with home games at ETSA Park. Most large sporting events take place at either AAMI Stadium (formerly Football Park) or the historic Adelaide Oval, home of the Southern Redbacks Cricket Team. Adelaide hosts an international cricket test every summer, along with a number of one day international cricket matches.
Adelaide has hosted the annual Tour Down Under bicycle race since 1999, an event which has gradually built an international reputation with each successive year it has been held. It is also host to the popular Bay to Birdwood run, featuring vintage and veteran cars from around the world.
Infrastructure
Health
Adelaide's first hospital was the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH), founded in 1840, it is one of the major hospitals in Adelaide and is a teaching hospital of the University of Adelaide. It has a capacity of 500 beds. Two other RAH campuses specialising in specific patient services located in the suburbs of Adelaide the Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre in Northfield, and the Glenside Campus Mental Health Service. The other two largest hospitals in the Adelaide area are the The Women's and Children's Hospital (305 beds), which is located on King William Road in North Adelaide and the Flinders Medical Centre (500 beds), which is located in Bedford Park, South Australia. These hospitals are also associated with medical schools the Women and Children's with the University of South Australia's Adelaide Campus and the Flinders Medical Centre with Flinders University.
Transport
Interchange on the South Eastern Freeway.
Being centrally located on the Australian mainland, Adelaide forms something of a strategic transport hub for east west and north south routes. The city itself has a limited public transport system, which is managed by and known as the Adelaide Metro. The Adelaide Metro consists of a contracted bus system including the Adelaide O Bahn (a guided busway), metropolitan railways, and the historic Adelaide Glenelg Tram. Road transport in Adelaide has historically been comparatively easier than many of the other Australian cities, with a well defined city layout and wide multiple lane roads from the beginning of its development. Historically, Adelaide was known as a "twenty minute city", with commuters having being able to travel from metropolitan outskirts to the city proper in roughly twenty minutes. However, these roads are now inadequate to cope with Adelaide's growing road traffic.
The Adelaide International Airport, located at West Beach, is Australia's newest and most advanced airport terminal and is designed to serve in excess of 5.4 million passengers annually. The new dual international domestic terminal was to replace the old and ageing terminals known locally as the 'tin sheds', and incorporates new state of the art features, such as glass aerobridges and the ability to cater for the new Airbus A380. The airport is designed to handle 27 aircraft simultaneously and it is capable of processing 3,000 passengers per hour.
Utilities
Adelaide has three major energy companies, which provide gas and electricity to the population. ETSA Utilities is the former government owned company (sold off by the Olsen Government in the 1990s) and the major player in the Adelaide electicity market. There are other smaller providers, AGL, Energy Australia and Origin Energy who provide services in electricity and natural gas. There has been substantial criticism in recent years of the suburban electricity network due to its inability to cope with high usage periods. Adelaide derives its electricity from a coal fired plant at Torrens Island and connections to the national grid. Adelaide's water supply is gained from its reservoirs: Mount Bold, Happy Valley, Myponga, Millbrook, Hope Valley, Little Para and South Para. Further water demands result in the pumping of water from the River Murray. The provider of water services is by the government owned SA Water.
Notes and References
div style "font size: 90 "
''Adelaide Council Naming Practices, courtesy Catholic University''
''South Australian Place Names. courtesy Government of South Australia''
''Adelaide's Inner and Outer Ring Routes, courtesy South Australian Department of Transport''
''Adelaide's Freeways A History from MATS to the Port River Expressway, courtesy Ozroads''
''Capital City Committee''
''Adelaide (Statistical Division), courtesy Australian Bureau of Statistics''
''South Australia Fact Sheet: Automotive, courtesy Business South Australia'' ''(.pdf)''
''South Australia's Credit Rating the Highest, courtesy Business South Australia''
''South Australia's Economic Performance Update, courtesy Business South Australia'' ''(.pdf)''
''South Australia: The Defence Industry Choice, courtesy Defence SA''
''Adelaide Cost of Living, courtesy Business South Australia''
''Metro Malcontent The Twenty Minute City No More, courtesy RAA'' ''(.pdf)''
div
Sister cities
Adelaide has several sister cities. They are:
valign "top"
Austin, Texas, United States 1983
Christchurch, New Zealand 1972
valign "top"
George Town, Penang Malaysia 1973
Himeji, Japan 1982
See also
Tallest Buildings in Adelaide
People of Adelaide
List of Adelaide railway stations
List of Adelaide suburbs
List of churches in Adelaide
List of sports clubs in Adelaide
Further reading
Kathryn Gargett Susan Marsden, ''Adelaide: A Brief History''. Adelaide: State History Centre, History Trust of South Australia in association with Adelaide City Council, 1952. ISBN 0730801160
Derek Whitelock et al, ''Adelaide : a sense of difference''. Melbourne: Arcadia, 2000. ISBN 0875606571
External links
br clear "all"
Category:Australian capital cities
Category:Cities in South Australia
Category:Coastal cities in Australia
bg:
da:Adelaide (Australien)
de:Adelaide
eo:Adelajdo
es:Adelaida
fa:
fi:Adelaide
fr:Ad la de (Australie)
gl:Adelaida Adelaide
he:
hu:Adelaida
id:Adelaide
is:Adelaide
it:Adelaide (Australia)
ja:
nl:Adelaide
pl:Adelajda
pt:Adelaide
ru:
simple:Adelaide
sv:Adelaide
uk:
vi:Adelaide
REDIRECT Australian Football League
class "infobox" style "width: 25em font size: 95 "
style "font size: larger " '''Australian Football League'''
align "center" colspan "2"
! colspan "2" bgcolor " b0c4de" '''General Information'''
style "vertical align: top "
'''Founded'''
1989, Melbourne
'''Previous Names'''
Victorian Football League or VFL (1897 1988)
'''Current Clubs'''
AdelaidebrBrisbane LionsbrCarltonbrCollingwoodbrEssendonbrFremantlebrGeelongbrHawthornbrKangaroosbrMelbournebrPort AdelaidebrRichmondbrSt KildabrSydneybrWest CoastbrWestern Bulldogs
style "vertical align: top "
'''Defunct Clubs'''
Fitzroybr Universitybr
'''Stadiums'''
Melbourne Cricket GroundbrTelstra StadiumbrTelstra Dome brAAMI StadiumbrSydney Cricket GroundbrSubiaco OvalbrThe GabbabrSkilled StadiumbrAurora StadiumbrManuka OvalbrMarrara OvalbrCarrara Stadium
! colspan "2" bgcolor " b0c4de" '''2005 Season'''
style "vertical align: top "
'''Premiers'''
'''Sydney''' 8.10 (58) defeated West Coast 7.12 (54)
'''Minor Premiers'''
Adelaide
'''Wooden Spoon'''
Carlton
'''NAB Cup Wizard Cup Premiers'''
Carlton
'''Brownlow Medalist'''
Ben Cousins
'''Coleman Medalist'''
Fraser Gehrig
'''Total Attendance'''
6,283,788
'''Average Match Attendance'''
35,703
style "vertical align: top "
''This is a page about the national league in Australian Rules Football. For information about the rules and history of the game see the Australian Rules Football page.''
The '''Australian Football League''' is the national competition in Australian Rules Football. It was formed through the expansion of the Victorian Football League, during the 1980s and 1990s. In 2005 it had a total regular season attendance of 6,283,788, and the average attendance of 35,703 was the third highest of any professional sports league in the world.
Administration
AFL
'''CEO''': Andrew Demetriou
'''General Manager Broadcasting, Strategy Major Projects''': Ben Buckley
'''General Manager Football Operations''': Adrian Anderson
AFL Players' Association
'''President''': Peter Bell
'''Vice President''': Nathan Buckley
'''CEO''': Brendon Gale
AFL Tribunal
AFL Tribunal
'''Chairman''': David Jones (replacing Brian Collins)
'''Members''':brJohn HassettbrWill Houghton QCbrAndrew TinneybrEmmett DunnebrMichael SextonbrWayne SchimmelbuschbrRichard Loveridge
AFL Appeals Board
'''Chairman''': Peter O'Callaghan
'''Members''':brBrian Collis QCbrBrian BourkebrJohn SchultzbrMichael Gree
AFL Grievance Tribunal
'''Chairman''': Jack Rush QC
'''Members''':brKevin PowerbrMichael MoncrieffbrDarren BaxterbrJames DowsleybrRoger Berryman
AFL Match Review Panel
'''Chairman''': Peter Schwab
'''Members''':brPeter CareybrAndrew McKay
Season Tournaments
Toyota AFL Premiership Season
The ''Toyota AFL Premiership Season'' lasts for 22 rounds and begins in late March, contested between 16 teams from around Australia.
At the end of the 22 rounds, the top eight teams compete in the ''Toyota AFL Finals Series'', in which teams compete in a Qualifying Final or Elimination Final, depending on the teams ladder position. At this stage, only six teams remain, and the bottom four teams play in a Semi Final, in which two teams are eliminated. The remaining four teams play in one of two Preliminary Finals, and the last two teams standing play in the Grand Final.
The winners of the Grand Final become the premiers of that year.
The Grand Final is always held at the Melbourne Cricket Ground,even if two non Victorian teams are playing.The only recent exception was Waverley Park in 1991 while the MCG was undergoing redevelopment.
NAB Cup
Before the premiership season commences, a knock out Cup competition is played. It has had several incarnations as the Escort Cup, the Fosters Cup, the Ansett Australia Cup, the Wizard Cup, and as of the 2006 season it will be known as the NAB Cup.
AFL Strongholds
Australian Rules Football is the dominant football code in every state and territory in Australia, except New South Wales and Queensland, where Rugby League dominates, and in A.C.T., where Rugby Union dominates. In Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania massive crowds attend many of the games and AFL is the dominant sport on television, print and radio news.
Clubs
(for more information go to List of Australian Rules Football Clubs)
Present
class "wikitable"
bgcolor efefef
! Club
! Logo
! City
! Home Ground
Adelaide Crows
Adelaide, South Australia
AAMI Stadium
Brisbane Lions
Brisbane, Queensland (merger of Brisbane Bears and defunct Fitzroy Football Club in 1996)
Brisbane Cricket Ground (The 'Gabba)
Carlton FC
Carlton, Melbourne, Victoria
Telstra DomebrMelbourne Cricket Ground
Collingwood FC
Collingwood, Melbourne,Victoria
Melbourne Cricket Ground
Essendon FC
Essendon, Melbourne, Victoria
Telstra Dome
Fremantle FC
Fremantle, Western Australia
Subiaco Oval
Geelong FC
Geelong, Victoria
Skilled Stadium
Hawthorn FC
Hawthorn, Melbourne, Victoria
Melbourne Cricket GroundbrAurora Stadium
Kangaroos FC
North Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria
Telstra DomebrMelbourne Cricket GroundbrManuka Oval
Melbourne FC
Melbourne, Victoria
Melbourne Cricket Ground
Port Adelaide FC
Port Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia AAMI Stadium
Richmond FC
Richmond, Melbourne, Victoria
Melbourne Cricket Ground
St. Kilda FC
St Kilda, Melbourne, Victoria
Telstra DomebrAurora Stadium
Sydney Swans
Sydney, New South Wales (relocated from South Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria in 1982)
Sydney Cricket GroundbrTelstra Stadium
West Coast Eagles FC
Perth, Western Australia
Subiaco Oval
Western Bulldogs
Footscray, Melbourne, Victoria
Telstra DomebrMarrara Oval
''(Note: Many clubs play several "home" matches at alternate grounds.)''
Former Teams
class "wikitable"
bgcolor efefef
! Club
! Logo
! Home City
! Last Home Ground
! Reason
Fitzroy FC
Fitzroy, Victoria
Whitten Oval
merged with the Brisbane Bears to become the Brisbane Lions in 1996
South Melbourne Football Club
Melbourne, Victoria
Lake Oval
relocated to Sydney in 1982 and changed trading name to the Sydney Swans
University FC
Melbourne, Victoria
Melbourne Cricket Ground
folded 1915, merged with Melbourne FC
VFL AFL Records
'''Highest score'''brGeelong 37.17 (239)brCarrara Oval, May 3, 1992.
'''Highest winning margin'''brFitzroy 190 pointsbrWaverley Park, July 28, 1979.
'''Largest crowd'''brCarlton v Collingwood 121,696 brMCG, September 26, 1970 (Grand Final)
'''Largest Home brMelbourne v Collingwood 99,346 brMCG, 1958
'''Largest Non Victorian crowd'''brSydney v West Coast Eagles 91,898 brMCG, September 24, 2005
'''Largest International crowd'''brMelbourne v Sydney 32,789brB.C. Place, Vancouver, Canada, 1987
'''Most premierships'''br Carlton Essendon 16
'''Most wooden spoons'''br St Kilda 26, most recent 2000
'''Most consecutive premierships'''brCollingwood 4br1927 1930
'''Most games won in a season'''brEssendon 24br2000
'''Most consecutive wins'''brGeelong 23br1952 1953
'''Most games played in a career'''brMichael Tuck (Hawthorn) 426 games
'''Most goals in a career'''brTony Lockett (St Kilda Sydney) 1,360 goals
'''Most goals in a game'''brFred Fanning (Melbourne) 18 goals
'''Most consecutive matches'''brJim Stynes (Melbourne) 244
'''Most consecutive matches from debut'''brJared Crouch (Sydney) 182
'''Tallest player'''brAaron Sandilands (Fremantle) 211cm
'''Shortest player'''brDanny Craven (St Kilda Brisbane) 162cm
'''Heaviest player'''brAaron Sandilands (Fremantle) 124kg
'''Longest kick'''brAlbert Thurgood (Essendon) 98.48m (109 yards, 1 foot, 3.2 inches)
Team Rivalries
